Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1901 - Award ceremony speech
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1902
Nobel Prize in Literature 1902
Theodor Mommsen
- Theodor Mommsen
Swedish   Academy
on December 10, 1902
The second paragraph of the Nobel statutes   states that «Literature» should include not only   belles-lettres, «but also other writings that in form or   content show literary value». This definition sanctions the   award of the Nobel Prize in Literature to philosophers, writers   on religious subjects, scientists, and historians, provided that   their work is distinguished by artistic excellence of   presentation as well as by the high value of its content.
The Swedish Academy this year had to make its choice among many   brilliant names that have been suggested. In giving the Prize to   the historian Theodor Mommsen, whose name had been proposed by   eighteen members of the Royal Prussian Academy of Sciences, it   has selected one of the most celebrated among them.
A bibliography of Mommsen’s published writings, compiled by   Zangemeister on the occasion of his seventieth birthday, contains   nine hundred and twenty items. One of Mommsen’s most important   projects was editing the
Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum
(1867-1959), a Herculean task despite the assistance of many   learned collaborators, for not only did Mommsen contribute to   each of the fifteen volumes but the organization of the total   work is his lasting achievement. A veritable hero in the field of   scholarship, Mommsen has done original and seminal research in   Roman law, epigraphy, numismatics, the chronology of Roman   history, and general Roman history. Even an otherwise prejudiced   critic admitted that he can speak with equal authority on an   Iapygian inscription, a fragment of Appius Caecus, and   agriculture in Carthage. The educated public knows him chiefly   through his
Römische Geschichte
(1854-55, 1885)   [
History of Rome
], and it is this monumental work in   particular that induced the Swedish Academy to award the Nobel   Prize to him.
The work began to appear in 1854; Volume IV has not yet been   published, but in 1885 he brought out Volume V, a masterly   description of the state of the provinces under the Empire, a   period so close to our own that the descriptions could be made to   apply to more recent fields of activity which are mentioned in   the Nobel statutes and which one can use as a starting point in   assessing the total work of the writer. Mommsen’s
Römische Geschichte
, which has been translated into   many languages, is distinguished by its thorough and   comprehensive scholarship as well as its vigorous and lively   style. Mommsen combines his command of the vast material with   acute judgment, strict method, a youthful vigour, and that   artistic presentation which alone can give life and concreteness   to a description. He knows how to separate the wheat from the   chaff, and it is difficult to decide whether one should give   higher praise and have more admiration for his vast knowledge and   the organizing power of his mind or for his intuitive imagination   and his ability to turn carefully investigated facts into a   living picture. His intuition and his creative power bridge the   gap between the historian and the poet. Mommsen felt this   relationship when in the fifth volume of his Roman history he   said that imagination is the mother not only of poetry but also   of history. Indeed, the similarities are great. Ranke’s detached   objectivity is reminiscent of Goethe’s calm greatness, and   England did right in burying Macaulay in the poets’ corner of   Westminster Abbey.
In a few bold strokes Mommsen has drawn the character of the   Roman people and shown how the Roman’s obedience to the state was   linked to the obedience of son to father. With extraordinary   skill he has unrolled the huge canvas of Rome’s development from   slight beginnings to world rule. He has shown how with the growth   of the Empire new tasks outgrew the old and stubbornly preserved   constitution; how the sovereignty of the comitia gradually became   a fiction, only incidentally realized by demagogues for their own   purposes; how the Senate took care of public affairs in an   honourable manner, but how the old aristocratic oligarchy that   had once served its purpose failed to meet new demands; how a   frequently unpatriotic capitalism abused its powers in political   speculations; and how the disappearance of the free peasant led   to disastrous consequences for the commonwealth. Mommsen also has   demonstrated how the frequent change of consuls hampered the   unified and consistent conduct of wars, which led to the   prolongation of military commands; how at the same time the   generals became increasingly independent and how Caesarism became   a necessity for many reasons but especially because of the lack   of institutions commensurate with the needs of the actual Empire;   and how absolutism in many cases would have caused less hardship   than the oligarchic rule. False grandeur vanishes before the   uncompromising eye of the historian, the wheat is separated from   the chaff and, like his admired Caesar, Mommsen has a clear eye   for practical needs and that freedom from illusions which he   praised in the conquerors of Gaul.
Various critics have objected that Mommsen is sometimes carried   away by his genius for subjective passionate judgments,   especially in his frequently unfavourable remarks concerning the   last partisans of dying freedom and the opponents of Caesar, and   concerning those who wavered between the parties during those   hard times. Objections, perhaps not always totally unjustified,   have been raised to Mommsen’s admiration of the power of genius   even where it breaks the law, as well as to his statement that in   history, which has no trials for high treason, a revolutionary   can be a farsighted and praiseworthy statesman. On the other   hand, it must be emphasized that Mommsen never glorifies brute   power, but extols that power which serves the high goals of the   state; and one has to record his firmly stated conviction that   «praise that is corrupted by the genius of evil sins against   the sacred spirit of history.» It has also been remarked   that Mommsen occasionally applies to ancient conditions modern   terms that cannot fully correspond to them (
Junkertum
, the   Roman Coblenz,
Camarilla
,
Lanzknechte
,
Marschälle
,
Sbirren
, etc.). But this method of   stressing the similarities between historical phenomena of   different ages is not a product of Mommsen’s imagination but of   his learning, which has at its disposal many analogues from   various periods of history. If it adds too much colour to the   narrative, it also adds freshness. Mommsen, by the way, is not a   historical materialist. He admires Polybius, but he blames him   for overlooking the ethical powers of man, and for having a too   mechanical
Weltanschauung
. Concerning C. Gracchus, the   inspired revolutionary whose measures he sometimes praises and   sometimes blames, he says that every state is built on sand   unless the ruler and the governed are tied together by a common   morality. A healthy family life is to him the core of the nation.   He severely condemns the curse of the Roman system of slavery. He   has seen how a people that still has energy can be morally   strengthened by disaster, and there is a pedagogical truth in his   words that just as Athens’ freedom was born out of the flames   with which the Persians ravaged the Acropolis, so today the unity   of Italy resulted from the conflagration that the Gauls caused in   Rome.
Learned, lively, sarcastic, and versatile, Mommsen has shed light   on the domestic and foreign affairs of Rome, her religion,   literature, law, finances, and customs. His descriptions are   magnificent; no reader can forget his accounts of the battles of   Lake Trasimene, Cannae, Aleria, and Pharsalus. His character   sketches are equally lively. In sharp and clear outlines we see   the profiles of the «political incendiary» C. Gracchus;   of Marius in his last period «when insanity became a power   and one plunged into abysses to avoid giddiness »; of Sulla,   in particular, an incomparable portrait that has become an   anthology piece; of the great Julius Caesar, Mommsen’s Roman   ideal; of Hannibal, Scipio Africanus, the victor of Zama – not to   mention the lesser figures whose features have been drawn clearly   by the master’s hand.
With regard to these portraits the historian Treitschke has said   that
Römische Geschichte
is the finest historical   work of the nineteenth century and that Mommsen’s Caesar and   Hannibal must cause enthusiasm in every young man, every young   soldier.
One finds in Mommsen a curious combination of qualities. He is   profoundly learned, a sober analyst of sources; yet he can be   passionate in his judgments. He describes in great detail and   with profound knowledge the inner workings of government and the   complexities of economics; but at the same time his battle scenes   and character sketches are brilliant. He is perhaps above all an   artist, and his
Römische Geschichte
is a gigantic   work of art. Belles-lettres, that noble flower of civilization,   receives the last mention in Nobel’s will; Mommsen will always be   counted among its prime representatives. When he delivered the   first volume of his
Römische Geschichte
to the   publisher, he wrote, «the labour has been immense», and   on the fiftieth anniversary of his doctorate he spoke fervently   of the boundless ocean of scholarship. But in his completed work   the labour, however great it may have been, has been obliterated   as in any true work of art which receives its own form from   nature. The reader treads on safe ground, unmolested by the surf.   The great work stands before our eyes as if cast in metal. In his   inaugural address in Cambridge, Lord Acton justly called Mommsen   one of the greatest writers of the present, and from this point   of view especially Mommsen deserves a great
literary
prize. The most recent German edition of
Römische   Geschichte
has just appeared. There are no changes. The work   has retained its freshness; it is a monument which, though it may   not possess the soft beauty of marble, is as perennial as bronze.   The scholar’s hand is visible everywhere, but so is the poet’s.   And, indeed, Mommsen did write poetry in his youth. The
Liederbuch dreier Freunde
[
Songbook of Three   Friends
] of 1843 is witness that he might have become a   servant of the Muses if, in his own words, circumstances had not   brought it about that «what with folios and with prose/not   every bud turned out a rose». Mommsen the historian was a   friend of Theodor Storm and an admirer of Mörike; even in   advanced years he translated works by the Italian poets Carducci   and Giacosa.
Arts and Sciences have often shown the capacity to keep their   practitioners young in spirit. Mommsen is both a scholar and an   artist, and at eighty-five he is young in his works. Even in old   age, as late as 1895, he made valuable contributions to the   Proceedings of the Prussian Academy of Sciences.
The medal of the Nobel Prize in Literature depicts a young man   listening to the inspirations of the Muses. Mommsen is an old   man, but he possesses the fire of youth, and one rarely realizes   as clearly as when reading Mommsen’s
Römische   Geschichte
that Clio was one of the Muses. That example of   pure history aroused our enthusiasm when we were young; it has   kept its power over our minds, as we learn when we reread it now   in our older days. Such is the power of historical scholarship if   it is combined with great art.
For the above reasons we are sending today a homage from the   country of Erik Gustaf Geijer to Theodor Mommsen.
At the banquet, C.D. af Wirsén   delivered a speech in German in which he praised «the master   of the art of historical exposition», and, in the name of   the Swedish Academy, invited those present to empty their glasses   in honour of the «great master of German historical   research». The Minister of Germany Count von Leyden, replied   for Theodor Mommsen, who was absent.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
