Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1903
Nobel Prize in Literature 1903
Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson
- Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1903
Again this year the names of several   candidates for the Nobel Prize in Literature have been submitted   to the Swedish Academy for its approval; some of them are authors   of European reputation. The Academy thinks that this year it   should give priority to the poet Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson.   Although we have the pleasure of seeing the illustrious laureate   at this ceremony, custom requires that I speak of him in the   third person as I give an account of the Academy’s decision. But   I reserve the right to address a few personal remarks to him at   the end.
Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson is so generally known and his   works are so familiar to educated Swedes that it is unnecessary   to give a comprehensive appreciation of his universally and   gladly acknowledged merits. Therefore I shall limit myself on   this solemn occasion to the following remarks.
The poet to whom with true satisfaction the Swedish Academy has   awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature was born at Kvikne, Norway,   where his father was a minister and where as a child he could   listen to the waters of the Orkla boiling at the bottom of a   gorge. The last years of his childhood were, however, spent at   Naesset in the beautiful valley of Romsdal where his father had   been transferred. The vicarage of Naesset is situated between the   two inlets of Langfjord, Eidsvaag and Eirisfjord. In that   picturesque countryside of Norway, between these two fjords, the   young boy often looked at the splendour of the sun setting behind   the mountain or in the sea. There he learned to do farmwork. His   love of the rustic nature of his country and his intimate   knowledge of the life of the people date from that time. At the   age of eleven he was sent to school at Molde. He did not do   brilliantly, but the development of a great poet is not always   measured by such standards. During his studies he came across one   author who was to have a profound influence on his life: he began   to read Sturleson. At this period, too, he became acquainted with   the stories of Asbjørnson and the works of   Oehlenschläger and Walter Scott. At the age of seventeen he   went to Christiania (Oslo) to prepare for his baccalaureate,   which he passed in 1852. Bjørnson has said that he knew of   his poetic vocation after he took part in the First Student   Assembly in Uppsala in 1856. In unforgettable words he has given   us his impressions of the church of Riddarholm lit up by the rays   of the setting sun, and of Stockholm in the splendour of the   summer. Then he wrote
Mellem slagene
(1857) [Between the   Battles] in a fortnight, to be followed by other works, among   them the story
Synnøve Solbakken
(1857) [
Sunny   Hill
]. Henceforth the reputation of Bjørnson was solidly   established and an uninterrupted series of new works spread his   name all over the world.
Bjørnson is a great epic and dramatic writer, but he is also   a great lyric poet.
Synnøve Solbakken
,
Arne
(1858), and
En glad gut
(1860) [
A Happy Boy
] put   him in the first rank of painters of contemporary life. In these   sombre accounts he reveals himself as a man of the country and of   the old saga; indeed it has been said, not without reason, that   he describes the life of the peasant in the light of saga. But it   should be added that the peasants whom he knew so well since his   Romsdal days have – in the judgments of competent persons –   preserved the laconic and reserved manner of talking which the   poet has reproduced with such felicity. Although this   reproduction is idealized and profoundly poetic, it is   nonetheless faithful and true to nature.
As a dramatist Bjørnson has treated historical subjects,   e.g.
Kong Sverre
(1861),
Sigurd Jorsalafar
(1872)   [Sigurd the Crusader], the masterly
Sigurd Slembe
(1862)   [Sigurd the Bad], in which the love of Audhild brings some light   into a sombre situation and where the figure of Finnepigen stands   in the splendour of an aurora borealis, the passionate drama
Maria Stuart i Shotland
(1864), and other creations of   genius. But he has been equally successful in his choice of   contemporary subjects, as in
Redaktøren
(1874)   [
The Editor
],
En fallit
(1874) [
The   Bankrupt
], etc. Even as an old man he has created a   disinterested portrait of love in
Paul Lange og Tora   Parsberg
(1898); in
Laboremus
(1901) he has extolled   the right of the moral life against the natural forces of   unrestrained passion. Finally, in
På Storhove
(1902)   [At Storhove] he has paid dramatic homage to the guardian forces   of the home as represented by Margareta, the faithful and   constant support of her family. It should in fact be observed   that Bjørnson’s characters are of a rare purity, that his   genius is always positive and in no way negative. His works are   never adulterated; on the contrary they are pure metal, and   whatever modifications the years and experience have imposed upon   his point of view and that of others, he has never ceased to   combat the claim of the senses to dominate man.
It is sometimes said that the Nobel Prize in Literature, designed   for the best literary work, should preferably be awarded to young   writers. That may be true, but even so the Academy believes it   has met all reasonable demands.
The creative power of this man of seventy-one is so great that he   published
På Storhove
in 1902, and the works   published afterward bear witness to the youthful spirit that he   has been able to preserve.
As a lyric poet Bjørnson is exemplary by his fresh   simplicity and his profound sentiments. His poems are an   inspirational source of inexhaustible wealth, and the melodious   character of his verse has tempted many a composer to set it to   music… No country has a more beautiful anthem than «Ja, vi   elsker dette Landet» [Yes, we love this country] by   Bjørnson, and when one eads the sublime song of«Arnljot   Gelline», in which the rhythms are like the majestic   movements of waves, one likes to think that in future times the   waves of memory will murmur «i store maaneskinsklare   Naetter» [in clear moon-lit nights] as they play the name of   the great national poet on the coasts of Norway.
Mr. Bjørnstjerne Bjørnson – Your genius has served the   purest and most elevated ideas; it has put the highest demands on   human life, in certain cases (
En hanske
, 1883 [
A   Gauntlet
] ) even thought too high by many. But in their noble   severity they are infinitely preferable to the laxness that is   all too prevalent in the literature of our day. Your inspired and   universally cknowledged poetic achievement, rooted in nature and   in the life of the people as well as in strong personal   convictions, combines morality and a healthy poetic freshness.   Hence the Swedish Academy has seen fit to render homage to your   illustrious genius by awarding you the Nobel Prize for this year,   and it respectfully asks His Majesty the King to deign to give   you this proof of its admiration.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
