Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1904
Nobel Prize in Literature 1904
Frédéric Mistral
José Echegaray
- Frédéric Mistral
- José Echegaray
Presentation   Speech by C.D. af Wirsén, Permanent Secretary of the
Swedish   Academy,
on December 10, 1904
One sometimes hears it said that the Nobel   Prizes should be awarded to authors still in the prime of life   and consequently at the height of their development, in order to   shelter them from material difficulties and assure them a wholly   independent situation.
The institutions charged with awarding these Prizes should like   to bear such striking witness to the value of a young genius; but   the statutes of the Nobel Foundation stipulate that the works   eligible for such a reward must be of exceptional importance and   confirmed by experience. Thus there cannot be any hesitation in   choosing between a talent in process of formation and a proven   genius at the end of his development. The jury does not have the   right to ignore a still active author of European fame, merely   because he is old. The works of an old writer are often proof of   a unique and youthful energy. The Swedish Academy therefore was   right to render homage to
Mommsen
and
Bjørnson
in awarding them Nobel   Prizes even at a time when both were past their prime. In making   its choice among the candidates proposed this year for the Nobel   Prize, the Academy has again given its attention to several   literary veterans of recognized fame, and it has wished to renew   its pledge to genius held in high esteem in the literary   world.
The Academy has thought particularly of two authors who would   both have been worthy of the whole Nobel Prize. Both have   attained the final limits not only of the poetic art, but even of   human life; one is seventy-four years old, the other two years   younger. Therefore the Academy believes it should not wait longer   to confer on them a distinction they both equally merit, although   from different points of view, and it has awarded half the annual   Prize to each. If the material value of the award is thus   diminished for each of the laureates, the Academy nonetheless   wishes to state publicly that, in this particular case, it   considers each of these two Prizes as the equivalent of the whole   Prize.
I
The Academy has given one of the awards to   the poet Frédéric Mistral. In the freshness of his   poetic inspiration this venerable old man is younger than most of   the poets of our time. One of his principal works,
Lou   pouèmo dóu rose
[
The Song of the Rhone
], was   published not long ago, in 1897, and when the Provençal   poets celebrated their fiftieth anniversary on May 31, 1904,   Mistral tuned his lyre for a poetry that in verve and vigour does   not yield to any of his previous works.
Mistral was born on September 8, 1830, in the village of Maiano   (in French, Maillane), which is situated midway between Avignon   and Arles in the Rhone Valley. He grew up in this magnificent   natural setting among the countryfolk and soon became familiar   with their work. His father, François Mistral, was a   well-to-do farmer, devoted to the customs of his faith and of his   ancestors. His mother nursed the soul of the child with the songs   and traditions of his birthplace.
During his studies at the College of Avignon, the young boy   learned the works of Homer and Virgil, which made a profound   impression on him, and one of his professors, the poet   Roumanille, inspired in him a deep love for his maternal   language, Provençal.
According to the wish of his father, Frédéric Mistral   took a law degree at Aix-en-Provence; after that he was left free   to choose his career as he pleased. His choice was soon made. He   devoted himself to poetry and painted the beauties of Provence in   the idiom of the country, an idiom which he was the first to   raise to the rank of a literary language.
His first attempt was a long poem about rustic life; then he   published poems in a collection entitled
Li   Prouvençalo
(1852). After that he spent seven   consecutive years on the work that established his universal   fame,
Mirèio
(1859).
The action of this poem is very simple. A good and attractive   peasant girl cannot marry a poor young man whom she loves because   her father refuses his consent. In despair she flees from the   paternal home and goes to seek succour at the church on the site   of the pilgrimage of the Three Saint Marys on the island of   Camargue in the Rhone delta. The author recounts in charming   fashion the youthful love of the young people and retraces with   masterly hand how Mirèio rushes across the rocky plains of   the Crau. Smitten by a sunstroke in the torrid Camargue, the   unfortunate young girl crawls to the chapel of the pilgrimage   site to die. There, in a vision, the three Marys appear to her at   the very instant in which she breathes her last.
The value of this work is not in the subject nor in the   imagination displayed in it, no matter how interesting the figure   of Mirèio may be. It lies in the art of linking together the   episodes of the story and of unreeling before our eyes all   Provence with its scenery, its memories, its ancient customs, and   the daily life of its inhabitants. Mistral says that he sings   only for the shepherds and the country people; he does so with   Homeric simplicity. He is, indeed, by his own admission, a   student of the great Homer. But far from imitating him slavishly,   he gives proof of a very personal originality in his descriptive   technique. A breath of the Golden Age animates a number of his   descriptions. How can one forget his paintings of the white   horses of the Camargue? Galloping, with manes flying in the wind,   they seem to have been touched by Neptune’s trident and set free   from the sea god’s chariot. If you remove them from their beloved   pastures at the edge of the sea, they always escape in the end.   Even after long years of absence, they return to the well-known   plains which they salute with their joyous neighing as they hear   again the breaking of the waves on the shore.
The rhythm of this poem has beauty and harmony, and its artistic   composition succeeds on all counts. The source from which Mistral   has drawn is not psychology; it is nature. Man himself is treated   purely as a child of nature. Let other poets sound the depths of   the human soul! Mirèio is a half-opened rose, still all   shining from the rosy light of dawn. This is the spontaneous work   of an original spirit and not the fruit of purely reflective   labour.
The poem was greeted with enthusiasm from its first appearance.   Lamartine, worn out with personal cares but always smitten by   beautiful poetic works, wrote «A great poet is born!»   He compared Mistral’s poem to one of the islands of an   archipelago, to a floating Delos which must have detached itself   from its group in order to join, in silence, the fragrant   Provence. He applied to Mistral these words of Virgil: «Tu   Marcellus eris!»
Seven years after the publication of
Mirèio
, Mistral   published a second work of equal dimensions,
Calendau
(1867). It has been said that the action f this poem is too   fantastic and improbable. But it matches its predecessor in the   charm of its descriptions. How could one question the grandeur of   its ideas about the ennoblement of man through trial? While
Mirèio
celebrates peasant life,
Calendau
presents a gripping picture of the sea and the forests. It is   like a brilliant glistening of water in several remarkably   precise scenes about the life of the fisherman.
Mistral is not only an epic poet; he is also a great lyricist.   His collection,
Lis Isclo d’or
(1876) [
Islands of   Gold
], contains some poems of an immortal beauty. Suffice it   to recall the stanzas on the drum of Arcole, on the dying mower,   on the chateau of Roumanin with its memories of the times of the   troubadours that seem to evoke the splendour of the sunsets, or,   agair, the beautiful mystic chant that should be spoken in the   veiled twilight of the evening, «la coumunioun di   sant».
In other lyric poems Mistral insists with fervour on the rights   of neo-Provençal to an independent existence and seeks to   protect it against all attempts to neglect or discredit it.
The poem in the form of a short story, «Nerto» (1884),   offers many beautiful pages for the reader’s admiration. But the   epic narrative,
Lou pouèmo dóu Rose
, is more   profound. Composed by a poet of sixty-seven years, it is still   full of life, and its numerous vignettes of the regions washed by   the Rhone are most engaging. What a superb type is that proud and   devout captain of the ship
Aprau
, who thinks that one must   be a sailor to know how to pray! Another ravishing little scene   shows us the pilot’s daughter, Anglora, whose imagination has   been fed on old legends. One night she imagines that she has seen   Lou Dra, the god of the river, in the moonlit waves of the Rhone   and that she has been touched by him. The very verses here seem   to stream and sparkle in the moonlight.
In short, Mistral’s works are all lofty monuments to the glory of   his beloved Provence.
This year is a year of celebration for him. Fifty years ago on   St. Estelle’s day he founded, together with six literary friends,   the Association of Provençal Poets, whose goal was to purify   and give a definitive form to the Provençal language. The   language which is spoken from St. Remy to Arles and, without   significant differences, in all the Rhone Valley from Orange to   Martigues, served as a basis for a new literary language, as   earlier the Florentine dialect had served to form Italian.   Experts such as Gaston Paris and Koschwitz tell us that this   movement was not at all retrograde. It did not seek to restore to   life the old Provençal, but on the basis of dialects in use   among the people, it attempted to create a national language   understood by all. The efforts of the Provençal poets have   not been slow to be crowned with success. In his great   neo-Provençal dictionary,
Tresor dóu   Félibrige
(1879-1886), a giant work on which he has   worked for more than twenty years, Mistral has recorded the   wealth of the Provençal dialects and built an imperishable   monument to the
lengo d’O
.
It goes without saying that a man like Mistral has received all   kinds of honours. The French Academy has awarded him a prize four   times. The Institute of France gave him the Reynaud prize of   10,000 francs for his dictionary. The universities of Halle and   Bonn have conferred honorary doctorates on him. Several of his   poems have been translated into various foreign languages.   Mirèio has been set to music by Gounod, and
Calendau
by the composer Maréchal.
One knows the motto given by Mistral to the Association of   Provençal Poets: «Lou soulèu me fai canta»   («The sun makes me sing»). His poems have, in effect,   spread the light of the Provençal sun in many countries,   even in Northern regions where they have made many hearts   rejoice.
Alfred Nobel demanded idealism from an author to be judged worthy   of the Prize he established. Is it not amply found in a poet   whose work, like that of Mistral, is distinguished by a healthy   and flourishing artistic idealism; in a man who has devoted his   entire life to an ideal, the restoration and development of the   spiritual interests of his native country, its language and its   literature ?
II
After the splendour of the Greek theatre,   it is principally among the English and the Spanish that a   national dramatic art has developed. To understand modern Spanish   drama, it is necessary to know what conditions in the life of   past periods lie behind it. For a long time Spanish drama has   displayed sharp contrasts. On the one hand, there is the most   luxurious flowering of fantasy; on the other, an extremely subtle   and at times conventional casuistry. In one place, there is   brilliant colouring, and in another, a great affection for   rhetorical antithesis. Emphatic language is coupled with tangled   intrigue. Striking effects are violent, the lyric order intense.   Disharmonies are sharp, and conflicts almost always have a tragic   resolution. Dialectic is vigorous. However, interior life is very   rich, and the severe, inflexibly applied dictates of honour do   not exclude the luxury of sudden expressions of fantasy. In   Spanish drama the artificial has managed to become fused with a   genuine originality.
The heir and continuator of these glorious and characteristic   traditions is the writer who has been awarded half of the Nobel   Prize this year. A son of the modern age and perfectly   independent in his judgments, he has not the same conception of   the world Calderón had. Loving liberty and having fought   often for tolerance, he is no friend of despotism or of   hierarchy, but still there is in him the same exotic ardour and   the same dignity which from oldest times have been the   distinctive marks of Spanish dramatists. This writer is José   de Echegaray. Like his forebears, he knows how to present   conflict, is extremely moving and vitally interested in different   temperaments and ideals, and like them he enjoys studying the   most complicated cases of conscience. He is complete master of   the art of producing in the audience pity and fear, the   well-known fundamental effects of tragedy. Just as in the masters   of the old Spanish drama, there is in him a striking union of the   most lively imagination and the most refined artistic sense. For   this it can be said of him – as a critic otherwise unsympathetic   to him declared – «that he is of pure Spanish breed».   However, his conception of the world is vast. His sense of duty   has been purified, his fundamental conceptions are benevolent,   and his moral heroism, while retaining a peculiar national   character, has the features of a universal humanity.
José de Echegaray was born in Madrid in 1833 but spent his   childhood years in Murcia, where his father held the chair of   Greek Studies at the Institute. Receiving his bachelor’s degree   at fourteen, he soon entered the School of Civil Engineering,   where he distinguished himself by his zealous application and his   penetrating skill. Five years later, in 1853, he completed his   engineering career after having compiled a most brilliant record.   Mathematics and mechanics had been his favourite studies, and his   singular understanding of these branches of learning enabled him,   after one year, to be appointed a professor in the very school   which he had so recently attended as a student. It appears that   for some years his struggle for existence was quite hard, and he   had to give private lessons in order to sustain the most modest   way of life. In spite of everything, he soon became an eminent   professor, distinguishing himself both in pure and applied   mathematics, and became an outstanding engineer. At the same time   he energetically studied political economy, embracing the ideas   of free trade. Soon, that great talent, that vivacious engineer,   was called to the highest and greatest tasks. Three times he has   been a minister of his country’s government. According to those   who know him, whether they were adversaries or friends, he has   always shown a singular skill in the administration of public   finance and public works.
We can easily understand the general astonishment when this   scholar, who had published treatises on analytic geometry,   physics, and electricity, dedicated his indefatigable energy to   writing for the theatre. It has been said that his creations for   the stage had the form of equations and problems. If the new   manifestation of his genius was enthusiastically acclaimed by   numerous admirers, it also found severe critics. Nevertheless, no   one could deny that his works were distinguished by a deep moral   sense. In a way, the critics were not mistaken who maintained   that in his dramas, following the example of some surgeons, he   rarely used any other method than that of «urere et   secare»; still, however, there is something to admire in   this Muse of romantic exaltation and austere severity which   condemns any compromise with duty.
Despising the transient approval of fashion and listening only to   the inspirations of his genius, Echegaray pursued his triumphal   career, demonstrating a dramatic fecundity which makes us think   of Lope de Vega and Calderón.
Even in his youth, when he was attending the School of Civil   Engineering, he was enthusiastic about drama and used his savings   to obtain theatre tickets. In 1865 he wrote a play entitled
La   hija natural
[The Illegitimate Daughter], which was followed   by
El libro talonario
[Book of Accounts] in 1874. The   playbill carried a pseudonym instead of the author’s name, but it   did not take the public long to guess that the acclaimed   dramatist was Echegaray, then Spain’s Minister of Finance. Some   months later
La última noche
[The Last Night] was   staged, and since then his fertile imagination has not stopped   engendering ever-new creations. He works with such speed that in   one year he has published three or four works. Since lack of time   prohibits a complete review here of all of his productions,   suffice it to make brief mention of some which have won general   attention. Echegaray scored his first triumph in November, 1874,   with the drama
La esposa del vengador
[The Avenger’s   Wife], in which his true genius was revealed and in which, side   by side with certain exaggerations, the greatest beauties can be   admired. The public could imagine that it had been taken back to   the Golden Age of Spanish drama, and it saluted Echegaray as the   regenerator of the most brilliant era of the nation’s dramatic   poetry.
En el puño de la espada
[The Sword’s Handle],   presented the following year, was received with the same   applause. The sublime power that is manifest in this noble   conception so moved the many spectators that the applause did not   stop with the performance, and, after the last act, Echegaray had   to appear on stage seven times to receive the acclaim of the   audience. But great controversies arose in 1878 when, in
En el   pilar y en la cruz
[The Stake and the Cross], the poet showed   himself the defender of free thought against intolerance, of   humanity against fanaticism. Typical of Echegaray, as he himself   has observed, is his
Conflicto entre dos deberes
[Conflict   of Duties], which was presented in 1882. A conflict of duties is   found in almost all of his dramas, but rarely has the conflict   been pushed to such an extreme as in this piece. Two other dramas   have made his name famous. These two inspired, excellent plays   are
O locura ó santidad
[
Madman or Saint
] and
El gran Galeoto
[
Great Galeoto
], the former   presented in January, 1877, and the latter in March, 1881. In
O locura ó santidad
there is a great wealth of ideas   and profound genius. It shows a man who, moved by his   righteousness to sacrifice his prosperity and worldly goods, is   considered crazy and treated as such by his friends and by the   world at large. Lorenzo de Avendano renounces a name and a   fortune when he learns unexpectedly but undeniably that they do   not legally belong to him, and he persists in his resolution when   the one indisputable proof of his illegitimacy has disappeared.   Such idealism is judged madness by his family, and Lorenzo is   looked upon by everybody as a Don Quixote, stubborn and   simple-minded. The structure of the drama is firm and solid,   demonstrating that it is the work of an engineer who calculates   precisely all the elements that have gone into it, but it shows   us to a still greater degree the poet of mature creative genius.   More than an external collision, it treats the internal conflict   of an extremely sad figure. It consists of a struggle between   duty and opportunism, and Lorenzo in following the dictate of his   conscience reaches martyrdom. Experience has always shown that   very frequently he who faithfully obeys his conscience must be   prepared to bear the fate of a martyr.
El gran Galeoto
made an even greater impression. In the   first month after it opened, it went through no fewer than five   editions and inspired a national subscription to honour its   author. Because of the masterful portrayal of the psychology of   the characters the play has a lasting value. It shows the power   of slander. The most innocent trait is disfigured and   scandalously deformed by the gossip of people. Ernesto and   Teodora have nothing for which to reproach themselves, but the   world believes them guilty, and at last, abandoned by everyone,   they end by throwing themselves into one another’s arms. Subtlety   of psychological analysis is revealed with such masterly detail   of observation that those two noble spirits, in no way desirous   of stealing the right of their neighbour, become mutually   enamoured without suspecting it. They discover the fact of their   love only by means of the persecution to which they see   themselves exposed. Romanticism triumphs in this drama whose   poetic beauty is clearly perceptible, whose lyric details possess   a dazzling colouring, and whose structure is without a   flaw.
Echegaray goes on working as a dramatist. This year (1904) he has   published a new play,
La desequilibrada
[The Disturbed   Woman], whose first act is a genuine masterpiece of exposition   and individualization, and which in its entirety reveals no   weakening of poetic inspiration. In this play, we are shown Don   Mauricio de Vargas, a clear type of that chivalry so dear to   Echegaray, that chivalry which does not want to buy even its own   happiness at the cost of compromising duty.
Thus it is just that the Nobel Prize be awarded to this great   poet, whose production is distinguished by its virile energy and   whose mode of seeing is impregnated with such high ideals that   with abundant reason an eminent German critic has been able to   say of him: «Er verlangt Recht und Pflichterfüllung   unter allen Umständen.»
Echegaray has put in the mouth of one of the characters of
El   gran Galeoto
the most pessimistic words about the world,   which «never recognizes the subtleties of the genius until   three centuries after his death».
No doubt this can happen. But against the general application of   the above thesis we can offer the justified admiration which the   work of Echegaray has aroused. To those tributes of appreciation   the Swedish Academy has agreed to add still one more, awarding   the Nobel Prize in homage to the celebrated poet, the honour and   glory of the Spanish Academy, José de Echegaray.
At the banquet, C.D. af Wirsén pointed   out that sharing in the Prize did not diminish in any way the   value of the laureates. He recalled to mind the works – pure,   limpid, and fresh – of Frédéric Mistral, naming the   principal ones and asking the Minister of France, Mr. Marchand,   to convey to the famous Provençal poet the homage which the   Swedish Academy and all those assembled took pleasure in   rendering him. The speaker then reviewed the imposing work of   Echegaray and expressed regrets for his state of health and   explained that the Minister of Spain had been prevented from   attending this banquet and from receiving the congratulations for   his famous countryman.
The Minister of France, Mr. Marchand, replied to the Secretary of   the Swedish Academy and recalled that in the preceding year he   had thanked them for the Prize awarded to
Mr. and Mrs. Curie
; this   time he spoke for the great poet of whom Provence is justly   proud. He told of a most touching event. Forty-five years ago the   French Academy, which did not have at its disposal resources as   great as those with which the great Nobel had endowed the Swedish   Academy, decided, at the suggestion of Lamartine, who was   enthusiastic about Mirèio, to award the prize of 3000 francs   to Mistral. When they asked the author, who had been leading a   simple life in the country, what he would do with the Prize, he   answered, «It is a prize for poetry; it is not to be   touched!» The modest poet shared his   «overabundance» with others.
Mr. Marchand also acted as spokesman for his colleague, the   Minister of Spain, to express Mr. Echegaray’s gratitude.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
