Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1905
Nobel Prize in Literature 1905
Henryk Sienkiewicz
- Henryk Sienkiewicz
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1905
Wherever the literature of a people is rich   and inexhaustible, the existence of that people is assured, for   the flower of civilization cannot grow on barren soil. But in   every nation there are some rare geniuses who concentrate in   themselves the spirit of the nation; they represent the national   character to the world. Although they cherish the memories of the   past of that people, they do so only to strengthen its hope for   the future. Their inspiration is deeply rooted in the past, like   the oaktree of Baublis in the desert of Lithuania, but the   branches are swayed by the winds of the day. Such a   representative of the literature and intellectual culture of a   whole people is the man to whom the Swedish Academy has this year   awarded the Nobel Prize. He is here and his name is Henryk   Sienkiewicz.
He was born in 1846. His youthful work
Szkice weglem
(1877) [Charcoal Sketches] breathes deep and tender sympathy for   the oppressed and disinherited of society. Of his other early   works one remembers especially the moving story of
Janko   muzykant
(1879) [
Janko the Musician
] and the brilliant   portrait of the
Lighthouse Keeper
(
Latarnik
, 1882).   The novella
Niewola tatarska
(1880) [Tartar Prison] gave a   foretaste of Henryk Sienkiewicz’s future performance in the   historical novel, in which he did not show his full ability until   the appearance of his famous trilogy. Of the three volumes
Ogniem i mieczem
[
With Fire and Sword
] appeared in   1884,
Potop
[
The Deluge
] in 1886-87, and finally
Pan Wolodyjowski
[
Pan Michael
] in 1888-89. The   first volume describes the revolt of the Cossacks supported by   the Tartars in 1648-49; the second deals with the Polish war   against Charles Gustave; and the third with the war against the   Turks, during which the fortress of Kamieniec was taken after a   heroic defence. The climax of
Ogniem i mieczem
is the   description of the siege of Sbaraz and of the internal struggle   of the inflexible Jeremi Wisniowiecki, debating within himself   whether his being indubitably the most resourceful general gives   him the right to usurp supreme command. The struggle of   conscience ends in the hero’s victory over his ambition. Let us   mention in passing that in his trilogy the author has described   three sieges, that of Sbaraz, that of Czestochowa, and finally   that of Kamieniec, without ever repeating himself in his   treatment of the theme.
Potop
contains many excellent   tableaux that remain in the reader’s memory. There is Kamicia, at   the beginning of the novel hardly more than an outlaw induced to   fight against his king, who under the influence of his love for a   noble woman regains the esteem that he had lost and accomplishes   a series of brilliant exploits in the service of the legal order.   Olenka, one of Sienkiewicz’ many beautiful female characters, is   ravishing in her religious faith, her incorruptible rigour, and   her devout patriotism. Even the villains in this story are   interesting. There is the sombre and masterly portrait of Prince   Janusz Radziwill, who took up arms against his country, and the   description of the banquet at which he tried to inveigle his   officers into betraying Poland. Even the traitor has his beauty,   and an English critic has drawn attention to the psychological   refinement with which Henryk Sienkiewicz shows us the prince   debating with his conscience and wilfully deluding himself into   believing that his rebellion would serve the cause of Poland.   Incapable of persisting for long in this voluntary blindness, the   prince dies of remorse vainly repressed. Even in the unreliable   and libertine Prince Boguslaw there are certain attractive traits   of personal courage, of courtly grace and cheerful insouciance.   Henryk Sienkiewicz knows people too well to present them   uniformly white or black. Another distinctive trait is   Sienkiewicz’ habit of never shutting his eyes to the faults of   his compatriots; rather he exposes them mercilessly, while he   renders justice to the abilities and courage of the enemies of   Poland. Like the old prophets of Israel he often tells his people   strong truths. Thus in his historical tableaux he blames the   excessive Polish desire for individual liberty, which frequently   led to a dissipation of energy and made impossible the sacrifice   of private interests to the public good. He upbraids the lords   for their quarrels and their unwillingness to adapt themselves to   the justifiable needs of the state. But Sienkiewicz is always a   patriot who certainly puts the brave chivalry of the Polish   people in its proper light and who emphasizes the great role   effectively played by Poland, formerly the bulwark of Christendom   against the Turks and the Tartars. This high objectivity is above   all proof of the wisdom of Sienkiewicz’ mind and his conception   of history. As a good Pole he must disapprove the attack of   Charles Gustave against Poland, but nonetheless he gives   brilliant portraits of the personal courage of the king and of   the excellent discipline and cohesion of the Swedish   troops.
It has often been said that
Pan Wolodyjowski
is the   weakest part of the trilogy. We find it hard to subscribe to that   opinion. One need only remember the moving account of how the   wife of Wolodyjowski escapes from the wily Tartar Azya who   combines the qualities of serpent and lion, or the admirable   portrait of Basia herself, that beautiful and dauntless soldier   wife who combines sweetness with gaiety and courage. The last   part of the trilogy is especially rich in gentle and purely human   features, as in the beautiful and sublime scene of farewell   between Basia and Wolodyjowski, who is about to let himself be   blown up with his fort. While the victorious Turks surround the   fortress of Kamieniec, when all means of rescue have been   exhausted and disaster is imminent, husband and wife are united   during an August night in a sort of niche formed by a walled-up   gate. He comforts her and reminds her how much happiness they had   been granted together and that death is merely a transition. The   first to begin the journey to the beyond would only prepare for   the coming of the other. The episode is marvellous and   enchanting. Although it is not sentimental, it contains such a   wealth of pure and true feeling that it is difficult to read it   without emotion. The description of Wolodyjowski’s burial is   equally grandiose, though in a different manner. At the foot of   the coffin Basia, stretched out on the tiles of the church, is   overcome by grief The chaplain beats the tambourine as if he were   giving a signal of alarm and exhorts the dead hero to rise from   the catafalque and combat the enemy as before. Then, mastering   this outburst of grief, he praises the manly courage and virtues   of the dead and prays to God that in this time of extreme danger   for the country He may give rise to a liberator. At this moment   Sobieski enters the church. All eyes’ turn toward him. Seized by   prophetic enthusiasm, the priest exclaims «Salvator»   and Sobieski falls to his knees at the side of Wolodyjowski’s   bier.
All of these descriptions are distinguished by great historical   truthfulness. Because of Sienkiewicz’ extensive researches and   his sense of history, his characters speak and act in the style   of the period. It is significant that among the many persons who   suggested Henryk Sienkiewicz for the Nobel Prize there were   eminent historians.
The trilogy abounds in descriptions of nature admirable in their   freshness. Where would one find the equivalent of the very short   but unforgettable description in
Ogniem i mieczem
of the   steppe as it awakens in the spring, when flowers rise from the   soil, insects buzz, wild geese pass over, birds sing, and wild   horses with floating manes and dilated nostrils rush away like a   whirlwind at the sight of a troop of soldiers?
Another remarkable trait of this grandiose trilogy is its humour.   The little knight Wolodyjowski is certainly admirably drawn, but   the portrait of the jovial nobleman Zagloba imprints itself   perhaps even more firmly in our memory. His vainglory, his girth,   and his taste for wine recall Falstaff, but these are their only   common traits. Whereas Falstaff is of a dissipated and   questionable character, Zagloba has a heart of gold; he is   faithful to his friends in times of danger. Zagloba himself   pretends to be a sober man, made to be a good priest, but in   truth he is much addicted to the pleasures of the table. He loves   wine and declares that only traitors renounce it because they are   afraid to give away their secrets when drunk; what makes him   especially abhor the Turks is the fact that they do not drink   wine. Zagloba is a terrible gossip – a quality that he considers   necessary in winter because otherwise the tongue might freeze and   become numb. He flaunts military decorations and boasts of   military exploits in which he never took part. In reality his   courage – for he has courage – is of another kind. He trembles   before every encounter like a coward, but once the battle has   begun he is seized by rage against the enemy who will not let him   live in peace and he becomes capable of true feats of courage, as   when he defeats the terrible Cossack Burlaj. Moreover, he is wily   and resourceful like Odysseus and often finds a way out when the   others have come to the end of their tether. He is basically a   debonair and emotional man, who sheds tears when some great   mishap befalls his friends. He is a good patriot and unlike so   many others he does not desert his king. It has been said that   the character of Zagloba lacks consistency because in the last   volume of the trilogy the grotesque gossip becomes more serious   and acquires more social consideration. This opinion is   inconsiderate. Sienkiewicz wanted to show us precisely how   Zagloba develops and becomes somewhat ennobled while at the same   time retaining his old faults. Such a relative improvement is all   the more natural as Zagloba despite all his bizarre faults is   basically as good as a child. Such as he is, Zagloba belongs   forever to the gallery of immortal comic characters of world   literature, and he is thoroughly original.
The diversity of Henryk Sienkiewicz’ talent became apparent when   in 1890 he passed from the warrior portraits of his trilogy to a   modern psychological novel and published
Bez dogmatu
[
Without Dogma
], which is considered by many critics his   main work. The novel is in the form of a journal, but unlike so   many other journals, it is never tiresome. With an art hardly   surpassed elsewhere it presents to us the type of a wordly man, a   religious and moral sceptic, who becomes unproductive because of   his morbid need for self-analysis. Through his perpetual   indecision, he prevents his own happiness, sacrifices that of   others, and finally succumbs. Ploszowski is a highly gifted man,   but he lacks moral bones, so to speak: he is without dogma. He is   hyper-aesthetic and extremely sophisticated, but the   sophistication cannot replace his lack of faith and spontaneity.   There is the figure of Anielka, delightful in her sad melancholy,   who watches the best hopes of her life pass away through the   egotism of Ploszowski, yet until the end remains faithful to the   laws of duty. The author shows us with insight how in a soul that   has once been Christian, like that of Ploszowski, the cult of   beauty is insufficient to fill the void left by the loss of   religious sentiment. Sienkiewicz has portrayed a type which   exists in all countries, a brilliant figure marred by   intellectual neurasthenia.
Bez dogmatu
is a profoundly   serious book that invites reflection, but at the same time it is   an exquisite work of art, delicately chiselled. The inspired   account vibrates with controlled melancholy, and if the book   appears at times cold, it is the cold of a work of sculpture   inherent in many beautiful and noble works of art. We find this   frequently, for instance, in the works of Goethe.
Bez dogmatu
was followed in 1894 by
Rodzina   Polanieckich
[
Children of the Soil
], a work less   inspired than
Bez dogmatu
but characterized by great depth   in its description of the contrast of a useful country life and   hollow cosmopolitanism. Here again we find the figure of a superb   woman, the candid, devoted, and tender Marynia. Critics have   raised objections to a detail; that is, the sin of passion which   Polanieckich commits. Far from defending him, the author has   illustrated how a man whose life is neither abnormal nor   excessive, let alone perverted, is nonetheless capable of   committing a fault, but soon comes to his senses and repents it   without soft complacency. The ties between Polanieckich and his   wife are re-established even more firmly at the end of the book,   and the novel is really a glorification of domestic virtues and   of sane and salutary social activity. There is much charm in the   delicately drawn portrait of the sick child Litka, who sacrifices   her child’s love for Polanieckich in order to reconcile him with   Marynia. The episode is sublime and rich in purity and moving   poetry.
The same critics who blamed his trilogy for being too long have   cavilled at the rapid pace of the short tale
Pojdzmy za   nim
(1892) [
Let Us Follow Him
], a simple sketch that   paints with great poetic beauty how the countess Antea, ill and   suffering from painful and dangerous hallucinations, is cured by   the dying and resurrected Saviour. In each case the criticism is   irrelevant, for the different subjects demand a different   treatment.
Pojdzmy za nim
is admittedly a sketch, but it   is a story of deep and moving sensibility. Thus a master’s casual   chalk sketch because of its intimate characters is often almost   equal in value to his more elaborate works.
Pojdzmy za nim
is written with noble piety; it is a modest flower growing at the   foot of the cross and enclosing in its blossom a drop of the   blood of the Saviour.
Religious subjects soon led Sienkiewicz to a vast work that has   become universally famous. In 1895-96 he wrote
Quo Vadis
.   This history of the persecutions under Nero had an extraordinary   success. The English translation sold 800,000 copies in England   and America in one year. Professor Brückner, the historian   of Polish literature in Berlin, estimated in 1901 that about two   million copies had been sold in these two countries alone.
Quo Vadis
has been translated into more than thirty   languages. Although one should not overestimate the importance of   such a success – bad books also spread easily provided they are   seductive – it still points clearly to the value of a work that   never addresses itself to the lower instincts of man but treats   an elevated subject in an elevated manner.
Quo Vadis
excellently describes the contrast between the sophisticated but   gangrened paganism with its pride, and humble and confident   Christianity, between egotism and love, between the insolent   luxury of the imperial palace and the silent concentration of the   catacombs. The descriptions of the fire at Rome and the bloody   scenes in the amphitheatre are without equal. Henryk Sienkiewicz   discreetly avoids making Nero a major character, but in a few   strokes he has portrayed to us the dilettante crowned with all   his vanity and the folly of his grandeur, all his false   exaltation, all his cult of superficial art void of moral sense,   and all his capricious cruelty. The portrait of Petronius, drawn   in greater detail, is even better. The author was able to rely on   the inspired sketch in the two short chapters of the sixteenth   book of Tacitus’
Annals
. Starting from these very brief   hints Sienkiewicz has constructed a psychological picture that   gives a strong appearance of truthfulness and is extremely   penetrating. Petronius, the man of sophisticated culture,
arbiter elegantiae
, is a bundle of contradictions.   Epicurean and above all sceptic, he considers life a deceptive   mirage. Pleasures have made him effeminate, but he still has the   courage of a man. While free of prejudices, he is at times   superstitious. His sense of good and evil is not strongly   developed, but his sense of the beautiful is all the more marked.   He is a man of the world and in delicate situations he is capable   of acquitting himself with skill and sang-froid without   compromising his dignity. The sceptic Pyrrhon and the poet of   pleasure Anacreon please him more than the uncouth moralists of   the Stoa. He despises the Christians, whom he knows little. It   seems to him pointless and unworthy of a man to render good for   bad according to Christian doctrine. To hope for a life after   death, as the Christians do, seems to him as strange as if one   were to announce that a new day begins at night. Ruined by the   favourite Tigellinus, Petronius dies with the serenity of a death   that he had sought himself. The entire description is perfect in   its genre. But
Quo Vadis
contains many other admirable   things. Especially beautiful is the episode, lit by the setting   sun, in which the apostle Paul goes to his martyrdom repeating to   himself the words that he had once written: «I have fought a   good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the   faith» (2 Tim., 4: 7).
After this major work Henryk Sienkiewicz returned to the national   Polish novel and in 1901 wrote
Krzyzacy
[
The Knights of   the Cross
]. The task was this time less easy than in the case   of the trilogy because there were fewer sources. But Sienkiewicz   overcame the difficulties and gave to his version a strong   medieval colour. The subject of the novel is the fight of the   Polish and Lithuanian nations against the Teutonic Knights who,   having long ago finished their original mission, had become an   oppressive institution more occupied with power and terrestrial   gains than with the cross whose insignia the members of the order   bore on their coats. It was the Archduke Jagiello, later King of   Poland under the name of Wladislaw II, who broke the dominance of   the order. He plays a role in the novel, although he is only   sketchily drawn according to Sienkiewicz’ custom of not giving   too much prominence to historical characters. The many characters   which are entirely the product of the author’s rich fancy attract   our attention more strongly and furnish excellent examples of   medieval civilization. It was a superstitious epoch and, although   the country had been Christianized for a long time, people still   put food out at night for vampires and revenants. Each saint had   his articular function. Apollonia was invoked for toothaches,   Liberius for stones. It is true that God the Father rules the   universe, but this very fact proves that he has no time to look   after human affairs of minor importance; consequently he has   delegated certain functions to saints. That epoch was indeed   superstitious, but it was also full of energy. Huge and solid,   the castle of the order stands at Marienburg. The Polish and   Lithuanian opponents of the monastic knights do not lack force,   either. There is Macko, crude, greedy, bent on the interests of   his family, but brave. There is the noble Zbyszko, his mind full   of chivalrous adventures. Surpassing all the others, colossal, as   if cut in granite, there is the redoubtable Jurand, cruel in his   hatred of the Teutonic Order and finally the victim of its   terrible revenge. In the hour of his humiliation he is more   sublime than ever because of his self-victory and the power of   his forgiveness. He is one of the most grandiose of Sienkiewicz’   warrior characters. Tableaux of gentleness alternate with those   of force. Queen Jadwiga is gentle, but her appearance is elusive.   The description of the funeral for the poor, sorely tested   Danusia is delicately beautiful like a softly chanted passion   service. On the other hand, the fresh and springlike picture of   Jagienka is radiant with exuberant health and liveliness. All   these creations have their individual life. Among the outstanding   minor characters are the irascible and bellicose Abbé,   unable to brook any contradiction, and Sanders, the seller of   indulgences, who sells a hoof of the donkey on which the flight   to Egypt took place, a piece of the ladder of Jacob, the tears of   the Egyptian Mary, and a little rust from the keys of St. Peter.   The closing episode, the battle of Tannenberg in 1410 in which   the squadrons of the Teutonic Order were crushed after a heroic   battle, is like the finale of a splendid musical drama.
Henryk Sienkiewicz is certainly the first to recognize his debt   to old Polish literature. That literature is indeed rich. Adam   Mickiewicz is its true Adam, its ancestor by virtue of the full   nature of the poetry that distinguishes his great epic. Brilliant   as the stars in the sky of Polish literature are the names of   Slowacki, a man of fertile imagination, and of the philosopher   Krasinski. The epic art has been successfully practised by men   like Korzeniowski, Kraszewski, and Rzewuski. But with Henryk   Sienkiewicz that art has reached its full bloom and presents   itself in its highest degree of objectivity.
If one surveys Sienkiewicz’ achievement it appears gigantic and   vast, and at every point noble and controlled. As for his epic   style, it is of absolute artistic perfection. That epic style   with its powerful over-all effect and the relative independence   of episodes is distinguished by naive and striking metaphors. In   this respect, as Geijer has remarked, Homer is the master because   he perceives grandeur in simplicity as, for example, when he   compares the warriors to flies that swarm around a pail of milk,   or when Patroklos, who all in tears asks Achilles to let him   fight against the enemies, is compared to a little girl who   weeping clings to the dress of her mother and wants to be taken   in her arms. A Swedish critic has noticed in Sienkiewicz some   similes that have the clarity of Homeric images. Thus the retreat   of an army is compared to a retreating wave that leaves mussels   and shells on the beach, or the beginning of gunfire is compared   to the barking of a village dog who is soon joined in chorus by   all the other dogs. The examples could be multiplied. The attack   on the front and rear of an army surrounded and subject to fire   from both sides is compared to a field that is reaped by two   groups of mowers who begin their work at opposite sides of the   field with the purpose of meeting in the middle. In
Krzyzacy
the Samogites rising from furrows attack the   German knights like a swarm of wasps whose nest has been damaged   by a careless wanderer. In
Pan Wolodyjowski
we also find   admirable images; in order to judge them we should remember that,   as often in Homer, the two terms of the comparison converge only   in one point, while the rest remains vague. Wolodyjowski with his   unique sword kills human lives around him as rapidly as a choir   boy after the mass snuffs the candles on the altar one after the   other with his long extinguisher. Hussein Pasha, the commander of   the Turkish army who vainly tries to leave by the gate that leads   to Jassy, returns to the camp to try another exit, just as a   poacher who has been tracked in a park tries to escape now on one   side and now on the other. The Christian martyrs of
Quo   Vadis
who are prepared for death are already as removed from   earthly places as mariners who have pushed off and left the quay.   Many more situations equally Homeric and yet equally natural and   spontaneous could be cited; thus in
Krzyzacy
Jagienka at   the unexpected sight of Zbyszko, who resembles a young prince,   stops short at the gate and nearly drops the jug of wine.
The literary production of Henryk Sienkiewicz is far from over.   At the moment he is in the process of publishing a new trilogy   entitled
Na polu chwaly
(1906) [
On the Field of   Glory
] that deals with the time of Sobieski.
His own poetic career has indeed unfolded on the field of glory.   He has received valuable tokens of the devotion of his people,   all the more precious since, despite his ardent patriotism, he   has never flattered his country. On the occasion of his   twenty-fifth anniversary as an author a grand national   subscription provided the means to buy the castle that had been   the original seat of his family and to offer it to him as a   present. He was saluted by delegations, congratulatory messages   were sent, and the Warsaw theatre staged a gala performance in   his honour.
An homage from the North has now been added to these proofs of   admiration, for the Swedish Academy has decided to award the   Nobel Prize in Literature of 1905 to Henryk Sienkiewicz.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
