Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1906
Nobel Prize in Literature 1906
Giosuè Carducci
- Giosuè Carducci
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1906
From the unusually large number of poets   and authors proposed for the Nobel Prize this year, the Swedish   Academy has chosen a great Italian poet who for a long time has   attracted the attention both of the Academy and of the entire   civilized world.
Since antiquity, Northern men have been drawn to Italy by her   history and her artistic treasures as well as by her sweet and   gentle climate. The Northerner does not stop until he has arrived   in the eternal city of Rome, just as the war for Italian unity   could not stop before Rome was conquered. But before arriving in   Rome the visitor is fascinated by the beauty of so many other   places. Among these, in the Appenines, is the Etruscan city of   Bologna, which is known to us through the
Songs of Enzo
by   Carl August Nicander.
Since the Middle Ages, when a famous university gave it the title   of learned, Bologna has been of great importance in the cultural   history of Italy. Although in ancient times it was renowned as an   authority on jurisprudence, it has now become especially famous   for its poetic marvels. Thus, it is today still worthy of the   expression «Bononia docet» (Bologna teaches). For its   greatest poetic attainments of the present, it is indebted to the   man to whom the Nobel Prize has been awarded this year –   Giosuè Carducci.
Carducci was born on July 27, 1835, in Val di Castello. He   himself has given an interesting account of his impressions from   his childhood and youth, and he has been the subject of several   good biographies.
In order to judge properly the development of his mind and his   talents, it is important to know that his father, Dr. Michele   Carducci, was a member of the Carboneria (a secret political   society working for Italian unity) and was active in the   political movements for Italian liberty, and that his mother was   an intelligent and liberal woman.
Michele obtained a position as a doctor in Castagneto. The young   poet thus spent his earliest years in the Tuscan Maremma. He   learned Latin from his father, and Latin literature was to become   very familiar to him. Although Carducci later opposed Manzoni’s   ideas with great fervour, he was also strongly influenced for a   long time by his father’s admiration for the poet. At this time   he also studied the
Iliad
and the
Aeneid
, Tasso’s
Gerusalemme
, Rollin’s Roman history, and Thier’s work on   the French Revolution.
It was a time of great political tension, and one can well   believe that in those days of discord and oppression the young   poet’s fiery imagination absorbed everything which had to do with   ancient liberty and the impending unification.
The boy soon turned into a little revolutionary. As he himself   recounts, in his games with his brothers and friends he organized   little republics which were governed by archons or consuls or   tribunes. Vigorous brawls frequently broke out. Revolution was   considered a normal state of affairs; civil war was always the   order of the day. The young Carducci stoned a make-believe Caesar   who was about to cross the Rubicon. Caesar had to flee and the   republic was saved. But the next day the little patriotic hero   got a sound trouncing from the conquering Caesar.
Not too much stress need be laid on these games, since they are   frequent among young boys. But Carducci did, in fact, embrace   strong republican sympathies in later life.
In 1849 the family moved to Florence, where Carducci was enrolled                in a new school. Here, in addition to his required studies, he first                read the poetry of Leopardi, Schiller, and Byron. And soon he started                writing poetry – satiric sonnets. He later studied at the Scuola                Normale Superiore in Pisa, where he seems to have shown a great                deal of energy in his work. After finishing his studies he became                a teacher of rhetoric in San Miniato. Because of his expressions                of radical ideas, the grand-ducal government annulled his later                election to a post at the Arezzo elementary school. Afterward, however,                he taught Greek at the lyceum in Pistoia. Finally he obtained a                chair at the University of Bologna, where he has had a long and                highly successful career.
These in brief are the general lines of his external life. There   has been no lack of struggle in his career. He was, for example,   even suspended for some time from teaching in Bologna, and on   several occasions he was involved in lively polemics with several   Italian authors. He suffered great personal tragedies, of which   his brother Dante’s suicide was undoubtedly the most painful. But   his family life and his love for his wife and children have   offered him great consolation.
The fight for Italian liberty was extremely important to the   development of his sensibility. Carducci was a passionate   patriot; he followed the war with all the fire of his soul. And   no matter how much he may have been embittered by the defeats at   Aspromonte and Mentana, and no matter how much he was   disillusioned by the new parliamentary government, which was not   being organized in accordance with his desires, he was,   nevertheless, overjoyed at the triumph of his sacred patriotic   cause.
His ardent nature was tormented by anything which in his opinion   interfered with the fulfilment of the work for Italian unity. He   was not one to wait patiently; he continuously demanded immediate   results and felt a strong aversion to diplomatic delays and the   diplomatic
festina lente
.
In the meantime his poetry blossomed abundantly. Although he is   also the author of excellent historical and literary criticism,   we should be concerned above all with his poetry, for it is   through his poetry that he has won his greatest fame.
The volume
Juvenilia
(1863) contains, as the title   indicates, his youthful work of the 1850’s. Two qualities   characterize this collection: on the one and, its classical cast   and intonation, sometimes carried to the point where Carducci   salutes Phoebus Apollo and Diana Trivia; and on the other, its   profoundly patriotic tone, accompanied by a violent hatred of the   Catholic Church and of the Pope’s power, the strongest obstacles   to Italian unity.
In strong opposition to ultramontanism, Carducci in his songs   evokes the memories of ancient Rome, the images of the great   French Revolution, and the figures of Garibaldi and Mazzini. At   times, when be believes Italy’s state hopeless and fears that all   of its ancient virtues and valiant deeds have been vitiated, he   plunges into the profoundest despair.
This bitterness helps to explain Carducci’s numerous attacks on   various authors and on other people; Carducci was generally   violent in his polemics. But in
Juvenilia
there are also   poems with a more positive content, like the song to Victor   Emanuel, written in 1859 at the moment when it became obvious   that a war with Austria would soon break out. In this song he   jubilantly celebrates the monarch who bore the banner of Italian   unity.
True patriotism is expressed in the sonnet «Magenta»   and in the poem «II Plebiscito», in which he renews his   enthusiastic praise of Victor Emanuel. . . The most beautiful of   the poems in
Juvenilia
is probably the poem to the Savoy   cross…
The later collection called
Levia Gravia
( 1868) [
Light   and Heavy
] contains the poems of the sixties. A certain   sadness can be heard in many of these poems. The long delay of   the conquest of Rome contributed much to Carducci’s bitter   feelings, but there were a great many other things which Carducci   passionately regretted in the prevailing politics of the day.   Carducci had expected more from the new political conditions than   they could offer. Yet we encounter some very beautiful poems in   this collection. Carducci was familiar with fourteenth-century   poetry, and a great many echoes of this epoch are heard, for   instance, in «Poeti di Parte Bianca» [«Poets of   the White Party»] and in his poem on the proclamation of the   Italian kingdom.
Only in the
Rime nuove
(1877) [New Rhymes] and in the   three collections of the
Odi barbare
(1877-89) [
The   Barbarian Odes
] do Carducci’s full lyrical maturity and   accomplished stylistic beauty appear. Here we no longer find the   same disdainful poet who fought with sword and fire under the   pseudonym of Enotrio Romano. Instead, the character of the poet   seems wholly transformed; sweeter, softer melodies are to be   heard. The introductory poem «Alla Rima» [«To   Rhyme»] is extremely musical, a true hymn to the beauty of   rhyme. Its ending excellently characterizes Carducci himself…   Evidently Carducci understood his own temperament, which he   compares with the Tyrrhenian Sea. But his uneasiness is not   continuous, and notes of real joy resound in the enchanting poem   «Idillio di Maggio» [«A May Eclogue»].   «Mattinata» [«Morning»], which clearly   recalls Hugo, is also lovely, as are the songs entitled   «Primavere Elleniche» [«Hellenic   Springtimes»] …
«Ca Ira» [«The Rebellion»], a section of the
Rime nuove
, is composed of a series of sonnets. Although   it is not of great poetic value, it does represent Carducci’s   more or less unreserved apotheosis of the French   Revolution.
The poet’s greatness is more fully revealed in his
Odi   barbare
, the first collection of which came out in 1877, the   second in 1882, and the third in 1889. There is some   justification, however, for criticism of the work’s form.
Although Carducci adopted ancient meters, he transformed them so   entirely that an ear accustomed to ancient poetry will not hear   the classical rhythms. Many of these poems attain the pinnacle of   perfection in their poetic content. Carducci’s genius has never   reached greater heights than in some of his
Odi barbare
.   One need only name the fascinating «Miramar» and the   melodious and melancholy poem «Alla Stazione in una   Mattinata d’Autunno» [«To the Station On an Autumn   Morning»], products of the most noble inspiration. The song   «Miramar» is about the unfortunate emperor Maximilian   and his brief Mexican adventure. It excels as much in its moving   tragic tone as it does in its vivid nature imagery. The Adriatic   shore is depicted with perfect mastery. This song exhales a   certain feeling of compassion which is rare in Carducci’s   treatment of Austrian subject matter, but which he expressed yet   another time in the beautiful song on the Empress Elizabeth’s sad   fate in
Rime e Ritmi
(1898) [Rhymes and Rythms]…
Many contrasts clearly are to be found in a violent and rich   poetic nature like Carducci’s. Disapproval from many sides has   thus been mixed with the just admiration for this poet. Yet   Carducci is without doubt one of the most powerful geniuses of   world literature, and such disapproval, voiced also by his   compatriots, has not been spared even the greatest poets. No one   is without defect.
The blame is not, however, directed at his sometimes passionate   republican tendencies. Let his opinions remain his own   possession. No one will contest his independent political   position. In any case, his hostility toward the monarchy has   subsided with the years. He has come more and more to consider   the Italian dynasty as the protector of Italian independence. In   fact, Carducci has even dedicated poems to the queen mother of   Italy, Margherita. A venerable woman revered by almost all   factions, her poetic soul has been celebrated by Carducci’s   grandiose art. He has paid her beautiful and affectionate homage   in the magnificent song «alla Regina d’Italia»   [«To the Queen of Italy»] and in the immortal poem   «Il Liuto e la Lira» [«Lute and Lyre»], in   which, through the Provençal sirventes and the pastoral, he   expresses his admiration of the noble princess… The petty,   obstinate republicans, because of these and other tributes, have   looked upon Carducci as a deserter of their cause. He justly   responded, however, that a song of admiration dedicated to a   magnanimous and good woman has nothing whatever to do with   politics, and that he reserved the right to think and write   whatever he pleased about the reigning Italian family and its   members.
The reasons for the antagonism of his friends and political   partisans toward him are of a completely different origin. This   antagonism is occasioned less by his ferocious assaults on   persons of differing political opinions than by his   overenthusiastic paganism, which often assumes a biting tone   toward Christianity itself. His anti-Christian sentiments have   above all produced his much discussed hymn to Satan.
There is a good deal of justice in many of the attacks on   Carducci’s anti-Christianity. Although one cannot perfectly   approve of the way in which he has tried to defend himself in
Confessioni e battaglie
[Confessions and Battles] and in   other writings, a knowledge of the attendant circumstances helps   to explain, if not to justify, Carducci’s attitudes.
Carducci’s paganism is understandable to a Protestant, at least.   As an ardent patriot who saw the Catholic Church as in many ways   a misguided and corrupt force opposed to the freedom of his   adored Italy, Carducci was quite likely to confuse Catholicism   with Christianity, extending to Christianity the severe judgments   with which he sometimes attacked the Church.
Still we must not forget the genuine religious sentiments   expressed in some of his poems. It is helpful to remember the end   of «La Chiesa di Polenta» [«The Church of   Polenta«], which stands in healthy contrast to «In una   Chiesa Gotica» [«In a Gothic Church»].
And as to the impetuous
Inno a Satana
(1865) [
Hymn to   Satan
], it would be a great wrong to Carducci to identify   him, for example, with Baudelaire and to accuse Carducci of   poisonous and unhealthy «Satanism» In fact, Carducci’s   Satan has an ill-chosen name. The poet clearly means to imply a   Lucifer in the literal sense of the word – the carrier of light,   the herald of free thought and culture, and the enemy of that   ascetic discipline which rejects or disparages natural rights.   Yet it seems strange to hear Savanarola praised in a poem in   which asceticism is condemned. The whole of the hymn abounds with   such contradictions. Carducci himself in recent times has   rejected the entire poem and has called it a «vulgar   sing-song». Thus, there is no reason to dwell any longer on   a poem which the poet himself has disavowed.
Carducci is a learned literary historian who has been nurtured by   ancient literature and by Dante and Petrarch. But he cannot be   easily classified. He is not devoted to romanticism, but rather   to the classical ideal and Petrarchan humanism. Regardless of the   criticism which can justly be launched against him, the   irrefutable truth remains that a poet who is always moved by   patriotism and a love of liberty, who never sacrifices his   opinions to gain favour, and who never indulges in base   sensualism, is a soul inspired by the highest ideals.
And insofar as his poetry in the aesthetic sense attains a rare   force, Carducci can be considered worthy in the highest degree of   the Nobel Prize in Literature.
The Swedish Academy thus pays respect to a poet who already   enjoys a world-wide reputation, and adds its homage of admiration   to the many praises already given him by his country. Italy has   elected Carducci senator and repaid the honour he has brought her   by assigning him a life-long pension amounting to a considerable   sum.
At the banquet, C.D. af Wirsén spoke   in Italian about the poet whom illness had prevented from coming   to Stockholm. Subsequently he addressed himself to the Italian   chargé d’affaires, Count Caprara, and recalled that through   the Nobel Prize Sweden had wanted to honour his country and one   of her greatest sons at the same time. Mr. Caprara expressed his   gratitude in French and, after a speech addressed to the country   of Alfred Nobel, promised to convey the homage to the poet.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
