Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1907
Nobel Prize in Literature 1907
Rudyard Kipling
- Rudyard Kipling
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1907
The suggestions for names of suitable   recipients of this year’s Nobel Prize in Literature have been   numerous, and there has been no dearth of exceedingly   well-qualified candidates for this honourable and coveted   distinction.
From these candidates, the Swedish Academy has selected for this   occasion a writer who belongs to Great Britain. For centuries   past the literature of England has flourished and blossomed with   marvellous luxuriance. When Tennyson’s immortal lyre was silenced   forever, the cry which is so customary at the passing of literary   giants was raised. With him the glorious reign of poetry is over;   there is none to take up the mantle. Similar despairing notes   were struck in this country on the demise of Tegnér, but it   is not so with the fair goddess Poetry. She does not perish, is   not deposed from her high estate; she but arrays herself in a   fresh garb to suit the altered tastes of a new age.
In the works of Tennyson idealism is so pervasive that it meets   the eye in a very palpable and direct form. Traits of idealism,   however, may be traced in the conceptions and gifts of writers   who differ widely from him, such writers who seem primarily   concerned with mere externals and who have won renown especially   for their vivid word-picturings of the various phases of the   strenuous, pulsating life of our own times, that life which is   often chequered and fretted by the painful struggle for existence   and by all its concomitant worries and embarrassments. This   description applies to Rudyard Kipling, to whom the Swedish   Academy has awarded the Nobel Prize in Literature this year. Of   him a French author, who has devoted much time and study to   English literature, wrote more than six years ago: «He,   Kipling, is undoubtedly the most noteworthy figure that has   appeared within recent years in the domain of English   literature.»
Kipling was born in Bombay on December 30, 1865. At the age of   six he was placed in the care of some relatives in England, but   he returned to India on reaching the age of seventeen. He   obtained a position on the staff of
The Civil and Military   Gazette
, published at Lahore, and in his early twenties   edited
The Pioneer
at Allahabad. In his capacity as a   journalist, and for his own purposes, he travelled extensively   throughout India. On those journeys he acquired a thorough   insight into Hindu conceptions and sentiments and became   intimately acquainted with the different Hindu groups, with their   varying customs and institutions, and with the special features   of English military life in India. This firm grasp of the true   inwardness of all things Indian is abundantly reflected in   Kipling’s writings, so much so that it has even been said that   they have brought India nearer home to the English nation than   has the construction of the Suez Canal. Of his early works the   satirical
Departmental Ditties
(1886) attracted notice by   the audacity of the allusions it contained, and by the   originality of its tone. Also among the early productions are
Plain Tales from the Hills
(1888) and
Soldiers   Three
(1888), collections of stories famous among other   things for the three lovingly drawn soldier types: Mulvaney,   Ortheris, and Learoyd. Other works in the same category are, for   instance,
The Story of the Gadsbys
(1888), In
Black and   White
(1888), and
Under the Deodars
(1889), all of   which are concerned with society life in Simla. The series   entitled Life’s Handicap, embracing some stories of serious   import, appeared in 1891. The same year saw the publication of
The Light that Failed
, a novel somewhat harsh in style but   containing some strongly coloured descriptive passages of   excellent effect.
As a poet Kipling was already full-fledged at the appearance of
Barrack Room Ballads
(1892), magnificent soldier-songs   brimming over with virile humour and depicting realistically   Tommy Atkins in all his phases, valiantly marching onward to   encounter dangers and misery wherever it pleases «the Widow   of Windsor», or her successor on the throne, to dispatch   him. In Kipling the British Army has found a minstrel to   interpret in a new, original, and tragicomical manner the toils   and deprivations through which it has to pass, and to depict its   life and work with abundant acknowledgment of the great qualities   it displays, but without the least trace of meretricious   embellishment. In his verses descriptive of soldiers and sailors   he so happily expresses their own thoughts, often in the very   language they themselves employ, that they appreciate him deeply   and, as we are told, sing his song whenever they have a pause in   the day’s occupations. Surely, there is hardly any greater mark   of honour that can be given to a poet than to be beloved by the   lower orders.
In the cycle entitled
The Seven Seas
(1896) Kipling   reveals himself as an imperialist, a citizen of a world-wide   empire. He has undoubtedly done more than any other writer of   pure literature to draw tighter the bonds of union between   England and her colonies.
In Sweden, as elsewhere, «the jungle books» by Kipling,   the first of which appeared in 1894, are much admired and   beloved. A primordial type of imaginative power inspired the   creator of these mythlike tales of the animals in whose midst   Mowgli waxed in strength: Bagheera the Black Panther, Baloo the   Bear, Kaa the cunning and mighty Rock-Python, Nag the White   Cobra, and the chattering, foolish Monkeys. Some of the scenes   are simply sublime; for instance, the one where Mowgli is resting   in «the living armchair» Kaa, while the latter, who has   witnessed so many generations of trees and animals, dreams of   bygone ages; or again when Mowgli causes Hathi the Elephant to   «let in the jungle» to take over the fields of men.   These descriptions display an instinctive feeling for a poetry of   nature which is quite phenomenal, and Kipling is far more in his   true element in the primeval grandeur of these jungle stories   than, for instance, in «The Ship that Found Herself»   (in
The Day’s Work
, 1898), an interesting though eccentric   personification of mechanical inventions.
The Jungle Book
tales have made Kipling a favourite author among children in many   countries. Adults share the delight experienced by the young and   relive their childhood while perusing these marvellously   delightful, wonderfully imaginative fables of animals.
Among the large number of Kipling’s creations,
Kim
(1901)   deserves special notice, for in the delineation of the Buddhist   priest, who goes on a pilgrimage along the banks of the stream   that purifies from sin, there is an elevated diction as well as a   tenderness and charm which are otherwise unusual traits in this   dashing writer’s style. There is, too, in the figure of the   little rascal Kim, the priest’s chela, a thorough type of   good-humoured roguishness.
The accusation has occasionally been made against Kipling that   his language is at times somewhat coarse and that his use of   soldier’s slang in some of the broadest of his songs and ballads   verges on the vulgar. Though there may be some truth in such   remarks, their importance is offset by the invigorating   directness and ethical stimulus of Kipling’s style. He has won   immense popularity, not only in the Anglo-Indian world, which   possesses in him a great literary master, but also far beyond the   limits of the vast British Empire. During his serious illness in   America in 1899, the American newspapers issued daily bulletins   regarding his condition, and the German Emperor dispatched a   telegram to his wife to express his earnest sympathy.
What is then the cause of this world-wide popularity that Kipling   enjoys? Or, rather: In what way has Kipling shown himself to   deserve it? How is it, too, that he has been deemed worthy of the   Nobel Prize in Literature, for which a writer must especially   show an idealism in his conceptions and in his art? The answer   follows:
Kipling may not be eminent essentially for the profundity of his   thought or for the surpassing wisdom of his meditations. Yet even   the most cursory observer sees immediately his absolutely unique   power of observation, capable of reproducing with astounding   accuracy the minutest detail from real life. However, the gift of   observation alone, be it ever so closely true to nature, would   not suffice as a qualification in this instance. There is   something else by which his poetical gifts are revealed. His   marvellous power of imagination enables him to give us not only   copies from nature but also visions out of his own inner   consciousness. His landscapes appear to the inner vision as   sudden apparitions do to the eye. In sketching a personality he   makes clear, almost in his first words, the peculiar traits of   that person’s character and temper. Creativeness which does not   rest content with merely photographing the temporary phases of   things but desires to penetrate to their inmost kernel and soul,   is the basis of his literary activity, as Kipling himself says:   «He draws the thing as he sees it for the God of things as   they are.» In these weighty words lies a real appreciation   of the poet’s responsibility in the exercise of his   calling.
Rudyard Kipling’s manly, at times brusque, energy does not   preclude tenderness and delicacy of touch, though these qualities   never clamour affectedly for recognition in his works. The simple   «Story of Muhammad Din» is imbued with the poetry of   genuine heartfelt emotion, and who can ever forget the little   drummer boys in «The Taking of Lungtumpen» (in
Plain   Tales
)?
In the innermost being of this indefatigable observer of life and   human nature vibrate strings attuned to a lofty note. His poem   «To the True Romance» reveals that yearning for a   patiently sought, never to be attained ideal that resides in   living form in the breast of every true poet, from where the   scenes and impressions of the sensuous world can never dislodge   it:
Enough for me in dreams to see
And touch thy garment’s hem:
Thy feet have trod so near to God
I may not follow them!
This writer’s philosophy of life is   diffused with a piety characteristic of the Old Testament, or   rather perhaps of Puritan times, wholly devoid of pretentiousness   or wordiness, based upon a conviction that «the fear of the   Lord is the beginning of wisdom» and that there exists a
God of our fathers, known of old,
Beneath whose awful Hand we hold
Dominion…
If Kipling is an idealist from an aesthetic   point of view by reason of poetical intuition, he is so, too,   from an ethical-religious standpoint by virtue of his sense of   duty, which has its inspiration in a faith firmly rooted in   conviction. He is acutely conscious of the truth that even the   mightiest states would perish unless they rested upon the sure   foundation in the citizens’ hearts of a loyal observance of the   law and a reasoned self-restraint. For Kipling, God is first and   foremost Almighty Providence, termed in
Life’s Handicap
a   «Greet Overseer». The English as a nation can well   appreciate these conceptions, and Kipling has become the nation’s   poet, owing not only to his numerous highly prized soldier-songs,   but perhaps quite as much to the brief lines of the hymn   («Recessional») which he composed on the occasion of   Queen Victoria’s Diamond Jubilee in 1897. Especially striking are   these words expressing genuine and humble religious feelings:
The tumult and the shouting dies;
The Captains and the Kings depart:
Still stands Thine ancient sacrifice,
An humble and a contrite heart.
The recessional hymn voices the spirit of   national pride, yet it also conveys a warning against the dangers   of presumptuous pride…
Quite naturally, during the Boer War Kipling sided with his own   nation, the English. He has, however, done full justice to the   heroic courage of he Boers, for his imperialism is not of the   uncompromising type that pays no regard to the sentiments of   others.
Many and varied are the movements that have had their vogue in   English literature, a literature unparalleled for wealth of   output and adorned to surpass all others by the immortal figure   of Shakespeare. In Kipling may be traced perhaps more of Swift   and Defoe than of Spenser, Keats, Shelley, or Tennyson. Clearly,   however, imagination is as strong in him as empirical   observation. Though he does not possess the refined and   sensuously beautiful style of Swinburne, yet he escapes, on the   other hand, all tendency toward a pagan worship of pleasure for   pleasure’s sake. He avoids all morbid sentimentality in matter   and Alexandrian superflorescence in form.
Kipling favours concreteness and concentration; empty   abstractions and circumlocutionary descriptions are wholly absent   from his works. He has a knack for finding the telling phrase,   the characteristic epithet, with swift accuracy and certainty. He   has been compared now to Bret Harte, now to Pierre Loti, now to   Dickens; he is, however, always original, and it would seem that   his powers of invention are inexhaustible. Nevertheless, the   apostle of the imagination is likewise, as stated above, the   standard-bearer of law-abidingness and discipline. The Laws of   the Jungle are the Laws of the Universe; if we ask what their   chief purport is, we shall receive the brief answer:   «Struggle, Duty, Obedience». Kipling thus advocates   courage, self-sacrifice, and loyalty; unmanliness and lack of   self-discipline are abominations to him, and in the world order   he perceives a nemesis before which presumption is constrained to   surrender.
If Kipling is quite independent as a writer, it does not follow   that he has learned nothing from others; even the greatest   masters have done so. With Bret Harte, Kipling shares his   appreciation of the picturesqueness of vagabond life, and with   Defoe his accuracy in depicting every detail and his sense of the   values of exactness in the use of terms and phrases. Like Dickens   he feels a keen sympathy with those of low degree in the   community, and like him he can perceive the humour in trifling   traits and acts. But his style is distinctively original and   personal. It accomplishes its ends by suggestion rather than by   description. It is not quite uniformly brilliant but it is always   eminently expressive and picturesque. The series
From Sea to   Sea
(1899) is a veritable model of graphic description,   whether the scene is laid in the Elephant City governed by the   Grand Divinity of Laziness, in Palm Island, or in Singapore, or   whether the story deals with manners and customs of Japan.   Kipling has at his command a large fund of irony – sometimes   highly pungent – but he has abundant resources of sympathy, too,   sympathy for the most part extended to those soldiers and sailors   who have upheld the honour of England in far-distant lands. He   has every right and reason to tell them: «I have eaten your   bread and your salt, I have drunk your water and wine, I have   lived your life, I have watched o’er your beds of   death.»
He attained fame and success as a very young man, but he has   continued to develop ever since. One of his biographers has   stated that there are three «notes» to be traced in his   authorship. The satirical note is found in
Departmental   Ditties
,
Plain Tales from the Hills
,
The Story of   the Gadsbys
, with its amusing commendation of single   blessedness, and in the much-debated novel,
The Light that   Failed
. The second, the note of sympathy and human kindness,   is most clearly marked in «The Story of Muhammad Din»   and in «Without Benefit of Clergy» (in
Life’s   Handicap
), a gem of heartfelt emotion. The third, the ethical   note, is clearly traceable in
Life’s Handicap
. Whether   there be much value or not in this classification which, as is   usually the case in such matters, cannot be consistently applied   to the whole of his production, one thing is certain: Kipling has   written and sung of faithful labour, fulfilment of duty, and love   of one’s country. Love of one’s country with Kipling does not   mean solely devotion to the island kingdom of England, but rather   an enthusiastic affection for the British Empire. The closer   uniting of that Empire’s separate members is a long and fervently   cherished aspiration of the poet’s. That is surely clear from his   exclamation: «What should they know of England who only   England know?»
Kipling has given us descriptions in vivid colours of many   different countries. But the picturesque surface of things has   not been the principal matter with him; he has always, in all   places, had a manly ideal before him: ever to be «ready, ay   ready at the call of duty» and then, when the appointed time   comes, to «go to God like a soldier».
The Swedish Academy, in awarding the Nobel Prize in Literature   this year to Rudyard Kipling, desires to pay a tribute of homage   to the literature of England, so rich in manifold glories, and to   the greatest genius in the realm of narrative that that country   has produced in our times.
There was no banquet because of the death   of King Oscar II of Sweden on December 8, 1907.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
