Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1908
Nobel Prize in Literature 1908
Rudolf Eucken
- Rudolf Eucken
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1908
Alfred Nobel was a man of action who,   during his successful business career in the competing markets of   many countries and in the international trade centres, had   developed an awareness of the inner contradictions and dangers of   modern developments. Mankind still seemed to him to need help,   and therefore he thought that the best investment for his own   fortune would be to use ts interest to support those of whom the   future would reveal that – in the words of his will –   «mankind profited most from them».
The ambiguity of all human work and its tools or weapons   challenged him to a personal deed in behalf of human progress. He   knew the enormous usefulness f his own technical inventions for   military purposes; therefore, he wanted to support any promising   efforts toward international peace. How could his worldly mind   have overlooked that all our civilization is full of strife, that   it invites abuse as well as proper use, and that it can be turned   toward evil as well as good?
His chief interest, however, was the intellectual sphere, despite   its inherent contradictions. It appeared to him, the cosmopolitan   familiar with the languages and civilizations of France and   England, as a complex of arts and sciences, of exact natural   science and humanistic belles-lettres. The former he sought to   stimulate by supporting discoveries and inventions for the   benefit of mankind. Turning to literature with the same   philanthropic concern, he established a prize for what he called   «excellence in works of an idealistic tendency».
Alfred Nobel was deeply influenced by the outlook of Victor   Rydberg’s poetry and philosophy. He knew what ideals mean to the   human mind, to the will that creates and maintains civilization,   cultivates and reaps its fruits, and through the struggle and   darkness of life breaks a path toward a new dawn of light and   peace. Wherever such ideals are manifested in their infinite   variety and strengthen the willingness of men to serve each other   – whether in the poet’s inspiration, the philosopher’s attempt to   solve the riddle of life, the historian’s biographies, or the   work of any scholar or writer that looks toward those ideals as   models in his freedom and independence – there one finds the   literature that Alfred Nobel had in mind. This literature makes   use of whatever art and science can offer, and from it mankind   «profits the most» precisely because it mirrors the   ideal truth without any regard for the useful. The creations and   forms of this literature are as manifold s the ideals, and they   are forever new and free.
The Swedish Academy has therefore felt that it acted with the   sanction of Alfred Nobel when it decided this year to award the   literary prize founded by Nobel to one of the most prominent   thinkers of our age, Professor Rudolf Eucken, «in   recognition of his earnest search for truth, his penetrating   power of thought, his wide range of vision, and the warmth and   strength of presentation with which in his numerous works he has   vindicated and developed an idealistic philosophy of   life».
For over thirty years Professor Eucken has been publishing   profound contributions in several areas of philosophy. His   activity as a writer has yielded increasingly many and important   books as his basic philosophy has become both more coherent and   more comprehensive. Particularly in recent years he has published   the works that afford us the most thorough introduction to his   thought; moreover, the wider public has received from him   uncommonly lucid and powerful expositions of his attempts to   resolve the most urgent problems of contemporary civilization.   Thus he is in the midst of giving the final shape to his mature   thought, and everywhere one can see new ideas which we hope he   will be able to develop fully in the near future.
I cannot here give a detailed account of Eucken’s long and   versatile career as a philosopher, because time is short and the   subject difficult for one with little knowledge of most of his   special fields. I can only make some generalizations and dwell in   particular on the historical foundations of his
Weltanschanung
and his views on the meaning of historical   processes. Professor Eucken considers history a decisive   influence on his philosophy, and it was philological and   historical studies that led him toward philosophy. Ever since his   early days the actual life of man and society has meant much more   to him than the abstractions of mere thought analysis.   Unfortunately we shall have to omit many interesting   ramifications of his thought in order to get a clear picture at   least of its main results.
The confident and rising idealism today in the intellectual life   not only of Germany but everywhere on the higher and freer levels   of civilized life is very different from those proud   constructions which bore that name and which went bankrupt half a   century ago with Hegel’s magnificent system. It was an attempt to   derive the inexhaustible wealth of life and the world from   abstract categories and concepts by means of a daring dialectic,   and to force all human research, all civilization, under the yoke   of a complete system of thought. But closer analysis revealed   this attempt to be beyond the competence of the philosophical   search for truth, and in fact it accelerated the change to an   equally dogmatic materialism.
We Swedes know that even at the zenith of dialectic absolutism   Boström directed his logical criticisms toward its basic   attitudes. By going back to earlier views both here and abroad,   he developed a different outlook which has had its adherents in   this country up to the present. There is an indisputable   resemblance between his views and those developed by Professor   Eucken in his writings. This is not surprising, for they both   represent a basic type that since the earliest days of   civilization – notwithstanding temporary eclipses – has preserved   its vitality in the face of pantheistic abstractions as well as   materialistic fear of thought. But this characteristic agreement   in their basic views does not exclude independent and personal   development; on the contrary it rather promotes it, and no branch   of philosophy has produced so many marked profiles as realistic   idealism. Socrates and Plato were led by this idealism to hold   that philosophy is a search for truth rather than a fixed dogma,   and this tireless search, by whatever means, has characterized   philosophy throughout the ages. Thus Eucken and Boström   reached their common goal by quite different means.
Since his youth Eucken has carefully observed the busy and steady   philosophical attempts to reassess external and inner experience   and to gain firm ground again after the collapse of the bold   philosophical systems. Philosophy turned in different directions   with varying expectations and success. Sometimes the motto was   «Back to Kant», and the great metaphysical iconoclast   served as a model for thorough studies of the limits of human   knowledge, or else one listened hesitantly to his declaration of   an eternal realm of reason based on unassailable moral   postulates. Again there were attempts to give philosophy a safe   position by tying it to the victorious advances of modern science   or, more successfully, by independently questioning its   presuppositions and methods. There were attempts to discover the   secrets of the human soul in its manifestations, whether by   observation or experiment, and there was hope that such research   would lead toward the discovery of the proper relation of   physical and psychological existence.
Eucken has been familiar with all these schools, but his main   field has been historical and critical research on the emergence   and development of mainstreams of thought in connection with the   evolution and change of general culture. Like so many pioneers in   his field, he has always been convinced that there can be no true   progress without a proper regard for tradition and that there is   more to the annals of philosophy than a kaleidoscope of systems   rising and falling with equal suddenness. As Eucken has often   emphasized, there can be no continuity in philosophy unless it   grows like the other sciences and continually treats and develops   the same problems, lest every mind should believe that he could   start all over from the beginning only to be replaced by someone   else in the same manner.
Apart from collections of monographs and essays in this field,   Eucken as early as 1878 published the first comprehensive results   of his method. In
Grundbegriffe der Gegenwart
[Basic   Concepts of Modern Thought] he discusses the origin, formulation,   and development of common modern concepts since the days of   ancient philosophy and scholasticism. Such terms are   «subjective nd objective», «experience and   evolution», «monism and dualism»,   «mechanistic and organic», «law and   individuality», «personality and character»,   «theoretical and practical», «immanence and   transcendence». But he is not interested merely in   definition of terms; he wants to describe the leading goals and   attitudes of a period by elucidating, in his own words,   «concepts as a mirror of their time». With each   dissection the object becomes more clearly delineated. In the   fourth edition, which appeared this year, the scope of the book   has widened; it has become a thorough critique of the conflicts   in modern civilization; accordingly, the title of the book has   been changed to
Geistige Strömungen der Gegenwart
(1908) [
Main Currents of Modern Thought
]. Indeed, the   author has developed his own basic ideas in it, and it is a   rewarding labour to study them in their wealth and   complexity.
A thinker who considers the perennial questions of human   civilization from this point of view will soon learn that he   cannot solve them either by ignoring their close interrelation or   by limiting himself to epistemological questions. Undoubtedly   these problems constantly impinge upon each other; they cover the   whole of human existence, influence individuals that are   particularly susceptible to their importance, and thereby   exercise a reforming power over entire communities and ages. The   attempt to trace them in their vital and seminal role amounts to   giving a comprehensive survey of human intellectual history. At   the same time such a project is more conducive to arousing and   widening philosophical interest than a mere analysis of   conflicting dogmas, schools, and sects. Eucken undertook such a   task in
Die Lebensanschauungen der grosser Denker: Eine   Entwicklungsgeschichte des Lebensproblems der Menschheit von   Plato his zur Gegenwart
(1890) [
The Problem of Human Life   as Viewed by the Great Thinkers from Plato to the Present   Time
]. This work, revised and expanded through seven   editions, bears witness not only to the depth and scope of   Eucken’s research but to his mastery of marshalling his thoughts   and to the maturity of his style.
Eucken has developed his own philosophy in several works such as
Der Kampf um einen geistigen Lebensinhalt: Neue Grundlegung   einer Weltanschauung
(1896) [The Struggle for a Spiritual   Content of Life: New Principles of a Philosophy] and
Grundlinien einer neuen Lebensanschauung
(1907) [
Life’s   Basis and Life’s Ideal: The Fundamentals of a New Philosophy of   Life
] as well as the more popular
Der Sinn und Wert des   Lebens
( I908)[
The Meaning and Value of Life
] and
Einführung in eine Philosophie des Geisteslebens
(1908) [Introduction to a Philosophy of the Mind]. The last   mentioned work in particular is a masterly and lucid exposition   of his views.
In recent years Eucken has also turned his attention to religious   questions, in
Der Wahrheitsgehalt der Religion
(1901)   [
The Truth of Religion
] and
Hauptprobleme der   Religionsphilosophie der Gegenwart
(1907) [Main Problems of   Contemporary Philosophy of Religion], the latter based on three   lectures delivered during a theological summer institute at the   University of   Jena. This year he has developed his ideas about the   philosophy of history at some length in a treatise that forms   part of the great encyclopaedic work
Die Kultur der   Gegenwart
[Contemporary Civilization]. According to hints in   recent works he is now planning a thorough re-examination of   ethical problems.
His deep insights into history and his significant attempts to   relate his own thoughts on the forces of life to the evidence of   history place Eucken far above the superficial attitudes that   exaggerate and misinterpret the inner meaning of history. These   attitudes, at the cost of an unprejudiced love of truth, have   become all too common in this century of history.
Furthermore, Eucken sees a threat to civilization in the   caricature of historicism, which partly intends to drag all firm   goals and higher aims into the whirlpool of a misunderstood   relativity and partly supports the frequent attempts to limit and   paralyze the human will by fitting all human developments and   achievements into a supposed naturalistic and fatalistic causal   nexus. But in contrast to Nietzsche, for instance, he does not   believe in the right or ability of the overweening individual to   maintain his own will to power in the face of the obligations to   the eternal majesty of moral laws. It is not the individual or   the superman in his separate existence, but the strong character   formed in the consciousness of free harmony with the intellectual   forces of the cosmos, and therefore profoundly independent, that   in Eucken’s view is called upon to liberate us from the   superficial compulsion of nature and the never completely   inescapable pressure of the historical chain of cause and   effect.
In history as well as in his personal existence man has life of a   higher nature, a life originating not in nature but existing in   itself and through itself, a life of the mind, which is in   reality beyond time but which is revealed to us only in temporal   manifestations. All true development presupposes some basis of   existence. To the extent to which man comes to participate in the   intellectual life, he acquires a power that is eternal and above   the vicissitudes of time. This eternal life is a realm of truth,   for truths with a limited existence are unthinkable. At the same   time it is an infinite whole of living power, far above the world   as it appears to us but exercising its influence in the world for   us and through us. It is not an abstract castle in the air to   which we can escape on the wings of a mystical and supposedly   logical imagination, but as a wholly living power it confronts   our entire personality with an either-or, a choice of the will   that makes the evolution of man and mankind a ceaseless struggle   between the higher and the lower life.
History is the mirror of mankind’s victories and defeats in this   struggle, the vicissitudes of which have been due to the   self-determination of the free personality. Hence no philosophy   of history can predict the future of this struggle. Even the   civilization handed to us as a heritage does not survive by   itself but demands our persistent and personal struggle for the   true and genuine life of the mind. Nothing else can justify and   support our endeavours for morality and art and our political and   social work.
«Utilitarianism,» Eucken says, «which ever form it   assumes, is irreconcilably opposed to true intellectual culture.   Any intellectual activity degenerates unless it is treated for   its own sake.» Although a great admirer and lover of art,   Eucken has turned with equal severity against the aestheticism   which is preached so loudly in our days and which «infects   only reflective and pleasure-loving hedonists». «No art   that values itself and its task can afford to condemn morality. A   creative artist of the highest order has hardly ever been a   follower of an aesthetic view of life.» Our Runeberg is a   poet after his heart, for such an outlook «with its   indifference to moral values and its arrogant exclusiveness is   quite foreign to him». And only those nations, whether great   or small, that have created and maintained a civilization full of   genuine intellectual life have a contribution to make to mankind.   A contribution may be made only by those nations whose future   consists not in a vain endeavour to use aterial force and weapons   to «transform quantity into quality», but in the ever   growing revelation of eternal life within the limits of temporal   existence.
Eucken does not reject a metaphysics that tries to express   conceptually those things that are accessible to us in the   infinite realm of truth and life. But he has not constructed an   everlasting system, nor did he want to do so. His philosophy,   which he himself calls a philosophy of action, operates primarily   with the forces of human evolution and is therefore more dynamic   than static. We may regard him as a
Kulturphilosoph
who   fully meets the standards and needs of our age.
Professor Eucken – The lofty and scholarly idealism of your
Weltanschauung,
which has found such vigorous expression   in your many and widely read works, has justified the Swedish   Academy in awarding to you the Nobel Prize in Literature for this   year.
The Academy greets you with sincere and respectful admiration and   hopes that your future works, too, will bear ample fruit for the   benefit of culture and humanity.
At the banquet, Harald Hjärne   addressed, in German, his personal congratulations to Professor   Eucken. He recalled Thuringia and, in particular, the University   of Jena, the heart of German humanism, and the relations of that   university with the history of the Swedish Reformation. In his   reply, Mr. Eucken spoke enthusiastically about the idealism for   which he had struggled and expressed his gratitude toward Sweden   and the Swedish Academy.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
