Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1909
Nobel Prize in Literature 1909
Selma Lagerlöf
- Selma Lagerlöf
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1909
History tells us that there was a time when   Sweden fought for a world prize on the field of martial honour.   The time of arms has passed, but in the international competition   for peaceful prizes our people have for a long time held a   position of esteem, and now the hour has finally come when Sweden   can enter into literary competition with the great nations. The   realm of the mind is determined by living powers that are not   measured by population or golden millions but by the idealistic   and ethical demands which they satisfy.
Geijer, Tegnér, or Runeberg, to mention only them, could   justly have laid claim to the Nobel Prize, and the development   which these great men have started has grown to fuller bloom. But   among the writers of the younger generation who have contributed   so much to our literature, there is one name that enjoys the   special splendour of a star of the first magnitude. In the works   of Selma Lagerlöf we seem to recognize the purest and best   features of our Great Swedish Mother. Five years ago the Swedish   Academy recognized the importance and strength of her achievement   for Swedish poetry by awarding her the Gold Medal «because   of the imaginative wealth, idealism, and narrative talent that   are evidenced in her works, which are beloved inside and outside   the borders of Sweden». This homage was strongly appreciated   by all classes in our nation. Surely the same nation will be   proud to hear today that the Swedish Academy has found Selma   Lagerlöf’s literary achievement so important that her works   should be counted among those considered the property of all   mankind and that they are full of the idealism which Nobel   required for the award of the Nobel Prize. It should not be   thought that this decision was inspired by excessive national   self-esteem, especially since many important foreign opinions   have supported her candidacy. Nor would anybody consider it a   lack of modesty if the Nobel Prize, which is now being awarded   for the ninth time, remains in the country of its founder; on the   contrary, such modesty could be interpreted as a lack of national   self-confidence.
Few first novels have attracted so much attention as
Gösta Berlings Saga
(1891). The work was significant   not only because it broke decisively with the unhealthy and false   realism of the times, but also because of its own original   character. Yet the work was not unanimously praised; if most   people admired it greatly, some criticized it severely. There   could be no better proof of its extraordinary character. One   could not help admiring an imagination that had not had its peer   since Almqvist’s days. However peculiar the characters and   situations created by this imagination might be, they were   covered by the marvellous bloom of artistic genius, and the   presentation at times exhibited rapturous beauty. The reader was   particularly moved by the profound feeling that in this work he   was encountering a forgotten piece of what had once been Swedish   country life; his heart was captured, just as the curious,   radiant surface of the picture enchanted his senses. This first   novel did have its weaknesses; how could it be otherwise! Where   is gold found pure; when does a genius enter the world completely   mature? But one thing was abundantly clear: a new genius of   genuine Swedish nature was trying its wings.
Soon she was to enter the realm of her true heritage, the   mystical world of fairy tales and legends. Only a soul that had   fed on legends since the days of childhood, and that added love   to a rich imagination, could dare to interpret the secrets of the   invisible world that the visionary always sees beside or rather   beneath the visible world. The visionary quality that is so   characteristic in Lagerlöf’s writings has been stronger in   her than in anyone since the days of St. Birgitta. Just as   refractions in the hot air of the desert create a vivid fata   morgana for the wanderer, so her warm and colourful imagination   possesses a wonderful power of giving to her visions the force of   living reality, which is instinctively recalled by whoever   listens to her poetry. This is particularly true of her   description of nature. For her, everything, even what is called   inanimate nature, has its own, invisible, but real life; and   therefore her artist’s hand is not content with representing the   outward beauty of nature. Her loving eye follows the inner life   whose silent language has been caught by her fine ear. That is   why she has succeeded in eliciting beautiful secrets from fairy   tales, living folk legends, and saints’ stories; secrets that had   been hidden from the wordly-wise but which true simplicity   perceives because, as the poet has the old grandmother say, it   «has eyes to see the secrets of God».
As a painter of peasant life she is completely original and can   compete with the best of other countries.
Tösen från   Stormyrtorpet
(1908) [
The Girl from the Marsh Croft
]   is inimitable in its realistic and faithful descriptions, and it   contains a new and deeper beauty in the irresistible power of   unselfish love which underlies the whole work. And there are many   other pieces of equal beauty. But Selma Lagerlöf’s talent   comes out most clearly in the proud achievement that bears the   name
Jerusalem
(1901-02) [
The Holy City
]. The deep   spiritual movements that have from time to time aroused the   peasant population of our country have rarely been traced so   clearly as in this description of the pilgrimage of the people of   Dalekarlia to the Holy Land. The reader sees things as dearly as   if he himself were experiencing how this strong breed with its   serious and introspective character goes its way, brooding   heavily over the riddles of life. And it is not surprising if   these people, torn between belief and superstition, in the   painful struggle between their love of the inherited soil and   their fear that they may not walk with God, finally abandon home,   since they believe that the bells on high admonish them to march   toward the holy city. But it is no less natural if these children   of voluntary exile, in the midst of their delight at having seen   the earth that had been touched by the foot of the Saviour, are   deep in their hearts consumed by the desire for the simple green   soil far north in old Dalarna. The sound of rivers and forests is   always in their ears. With loving perception the poet has sounded   the secret depth of their souls and a bloom of purest poetry   transforms the realistic and faithful description of their   touching and simple lives. The introduction to
Jerusalem
,   entitled «Ingemarssönerna» [Ingemar’s Sons],   movingly intimates that the lives and deeds of the fathers work   like a force of destiny on later generations.
Selma Lagerlöf’s style deserves our full appreciation. Like   a loyal daughter, she has administered the rich heritage of her   mother tongue; from this source come the purity of diction, the   clarity of expression, and the musical beauty that are   characteristic of all her works.
Purity and simplicity of diction, beauty of style, and power of   imagination, however, are accompanied by ethical strength and   deep religious feeling. And indeed it could not be otherwise in   someone to whom the life of man is a «thread on God’s great   loom». In poetry of such elevation the air is always pure;   more than one of her beautiful legends reflect the simplicity and   loftiness of Scripture. But what makes Selma Lagerlöf’s   writings so lovable is that we always seem to hear in them an   echo of the most peculiar, the strongest, and the best things   that have ever moved the soul of the Swedish people. Few have   comprehended the innermost nature of this people with a   comparable love. It is her own heart that speaks when in
Tösen från Stormyrtorpet
the strict judge, whose   severe features have increasingly brightened at the sight of the   sacrificial love of the young girl, finally says with deep   emotion to himself: «That is my people. I shall not be angry   with them since there is so much love and fear of God in one of   their humblest creatures.» Such an intimate and profound   view is possible only for one whose soul is deeply rooted in the   Swedish earth and who has sucked nourishment from its myths,   history, folklore, and nature. It is easy to understand why the   mystical, nostalgic, and miraculous dusk that is peculiar to the   Nordic nature is reflected in all her works. The greatness of her   art consists precisely in her ability to use her heart as well as   her genius to give to the original peculiar character and   attitudes of the people a shape in which we recognize   ourselves.
We are acting according to the will of the founder if we honour   those who have had such success in appealing to the best sides of   the human heart, and whose name and achievement have penetrated   far beyond the borders of Sweden. Nor should anyone who bears a   famous literary name, whether inside or outside the country, be   envious if the Swedish Academy today pronounces that it has   awarded this year’s Nobel Prize in Literature to Sweden’s   distinguished daughter, Selma Lagerlöf
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
