Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1911
Nobel Prize in Literature 1911
Maurice Maeterlinck
- Maurice Maeterlinck
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1911
This year highly competent persons have   proposed several men of letters as candidates for the Nobel Prize   in Literature. Several among them presented such great and   unusual qualities that it has been very difficult to weigh their   respective merits. In giving this year’s award to Maurice   Maeterlinck, who has been proposed and seriously considered   several times before, the Swedish Academy has been determined   first by the profound originality and singularity of his talent   as a writer, so different from the usual forms of literature. The   idealistic character of this talent is elevated to a rare   spirituality and mysteriously causes delicate and secret strings   to vibrate in us. He is certainly not of a shallow nature, this   unusual man, who has not yet reached the age of fifty and who, as   an author, follows his own quite personal voice and possesses the   marvellous faculty of being at once mystical, profound, and   popular through the charm of his expression. While reading him   one sometimes recalls the words of Sophocles, «Man is only a   trivial shadow», or the words of Calderon that life is a   dream; and yet Maeterlinck knows how to render the fine nuances   of our moral life with the force of a visionary. What in ordinary   circumstances dwells in us latently and belongs to the secret   depths of our being, he calls up with the tap of a wand, and we   acknowledge that he has evoked features of our most intimate   being, which ordinarily remains hidden in a mysterious twilight.   He does it without affectation and mannerisms and mostly with an   unfailing sureness and classical refinement, although action and   scenery are often vague – like a Chinese shadow show – and in   keeping with the great subtlety of his poetry. Legendary and   fantastic as the narration may be, the dialogue is pointed. With   the sounds of muted music, the poet introduces us to unsuspected   regions of our inner being, and we feel with Goethe that   «Alles Vergängliche/Ist nur ein Gleichnis». We   have the foreboding that our true home is far away, well beyond   the limits of our earthly experiences. We hardly ever pass beyond   this foreboding with Maeterlinck, although his poetry opens for   us glimpses of inaccessible distances.
Maurice Maeterlinck was born in 1862 at Ghent. His family appears   to have been well-to-do. He was educated at the Jesuit college of   Saint-Barbe. He did not like it, but this conventional school   probably influenced his intellectual development very strongly by   orienting him toward mysticism. After finishing school and   passing the baccalaureate, Maeterlinck followed the wishes of his   parents, read law, and established himself in Ghent as a lawyer.   But he succeeded, according to his biographer Gerard Harry, only   in demonstrating brilliantly his ineptitude for the legal career,   having the «happy defects» that render a man absolutely   unfit for the pettifogging quarrels and public counsel’s speeches   in the law court. He was attracted by literature, and this   attraction increased during a stay in Paris where he became   acquainted with a number of writers, one of whom, Villiers de   l’Isle Adam, apparently had a great influence on him. Paris   fascinated Maurice Maeterlinck so much that he established   himself there in 1896. Nonetheless, the great metropolis did not   really suit this solitary contemplative mind as a permanent place   to live. He goes there, from time to time, to deal with his   editors, but in the summer he likes to live at Saint-Wandrille,   an old Norman abbey which he bought and saved from imminent   vandalism. In the winter he seeks refuge in the mild climate of   the town of Grasse, known for its flowers.
The first work published by Maurice Maeterlinck was a slim   collection of verses entitled
Serres chaudes
(1889)   [Ardent Talons]. These poems appear more tormented than one would   have expected from his calmly meditative disposition. The same   year (1889) he published a dramatic fantasy,
La Princesse   Maleine
. It is sombre, terrifying, and deliberately   monotonous due to numerous repetitions intended to give an   impression of duration; but a delightful fairy-tale charm reigns   in this little drama, which is written with a vigour one would   not have suspected in the author of the
Serres chaudes
. It   is in any case an important work of art.
La Princesse   Maleine
was enthusiastically praised by Octave Mirbeau in
Le Figaro
, and from that day on Maurice Maeterlinck was no   longer unknown. Later on, Maeterlinck wrote a whole series of   dramatic compositions. Most unfold in eras that we could not   determine and in places not to be found on any map. The scene is   usually a fairy castle with underground passages, a park with   lovely shady places, or a lighthouse with the sea in the   distance. In these melancholy regions figures often move veiled   like the idea itself. In several of his most perfect scenic   works, Maurice Maeterlinck is a symbolist and an agnostic; but   one should not conclude that he is a materialist. With the   instinct and imagination of the poet he feels that man does not   belong solely to the tangible world, and he expressly says that   poetry does not satisfy if it does not make us perceive a   reflection of the more profound and secret reality that is the   source of phenomena. Sometimes this background appears to him in   an obscure and misty fashion like an ensemble of occult powers of   which men are easily the victims, and he then attributes to the   occult force a fatal omnipotence that destroys our freedom. But   in several dramatic works he has mitigated this conception; he   has given more room to hope and to mixed mystic influences, less   to reality. The main idea which always dominates, especially in   his best works, is that the spiritual, real, intimate, and   profound life of man, which is manifested precisely in his most   spontaneous acts, must be sought in the realms beyond thought and   discursive reason. It is these acts which Maeterlinck excels in   representing with the almost somnambulant imaginative power and   dreaming spirit of a visionary but with the precision of a   perfect artist. At the same time the expression is stylized; the   simplification of the technique is pushed as far as possible   without harming the understanding of the drama.
A more pronounced deism would have had a beneficial influence on   his dramas because it would have made them less similar to shadow   plays; but one should not disparage the creations of his genius.   Like Spinoza and Hegel, who were great thinkers though not   deists, Maeterlinck is a very great poet although his conception   of things and of life is not that of a deist. He does not deny   anything: he simply finds the principle of existence hidden in   the shadows. Besides, is not agnosticism in some degree   excusable, since no human reason could ever formulate an exact   notion of the origin of existence which in many aspects is   accessible only to intuition and to faith? And if Maurice   Maeterlinck’s characters are sometimes creatures of dreams, they   are still very human, for Shakespeare was not wrong in   stating:
We are such stuff
As dreams are made on, and our little life
Is rounded with a sleep.
Besides, Maeterlinck is in no way a   polemist; in almost all his works there breathes a sweet,   sometimes melancholy soul, so that in poetic beauty he excels   many writers whose conception of the world rests perhaps more on   the concept of personality. Maurice Maeterlinck is evidently a   man who has felt and thought profoundly. Homage must be rendered   to his sincere thirst for truth, and it must be remembered that   there exist for him a law and an inner right which invariably   command and direct man in the midst of a world where so many   things seem to encourage injustice. If Maurice Maeterlinck, who   has passed through so many stages of inner development, sometimes   speaks of «gravitation» as the power that rules the   world, and apparently wants to substitute it for religion, one   would hardly be wrong (considering his symbolism) in taking the   word «gravitation» as a symbolic expression of that law   of religio-ethical gravity to which, if I may say so, all are   obedient.
There is no time to list all of Maeterlinck’s works; however, it   seems right to me on this solemn occasion to recall very briefly   the most characteristic ones.
The pitiless, mysterious power of death has rarely been rendered   in more poignant fashion than in Maeterlinck’s little piece,
L’Intruse
(1890) [
The Intruder
]. Among all those   who surround the sick mother and who hope for her recovery, only   the old blind grandfather notices furtive and sliding steps in   the garden where the cyprus trees are beginning to rustle and   where the nightingale is hushed; he feels a cold breeze pass, he   hears a scythe being whetted, he reckons that someone invisible   to the others has entered to sit in their circle. On the stroke   of midnight there is a noise as if someone had suddenly stood up   and gone away; at the same instant the sick one dies. The guest   no one can escape has passed there. The portent is described with   great force and subtlety. The short play
Les Aveugles
(1890) [
The Blind
], which shows the same foreboding of   disaster, is perhaps even more melancholy. The sightless have   followed their guide, an old sick priest; and there in the middle   of the forest they believe they have lost him. In reality he is   in the middle of them but he is dead. Little by little they   realize his death. How will they now find their refuge?
In
Pelléas et Mélisande
(1892) and
Alladine   et Palomides
(1894) we find in different variants the fatal   power of love which Maeterlinck describes with a fantastic   imagination – that love which, fettered by other bonds or by   external circumstances, neither could nor should attain a happy   ending, but which is crushed by a fatality against which human   strength breaks.
The most inspired of Maeterlinck’s dramas is unquestionably his
Aglavaine et Sélysette
(1896), one of the purest   jewels in world literature. This play is deeply melancholic but   contains poetic treasures. Méléandre, who has married   the sweet, timid Sélysette, begins to love the noble   Aglavaine, a love Aglavaine returns. Theirs is a pure love which   raises them above the common lot. But Sélysette suffers from   not possessing Méléandre’s heart alone. The tender   creature, full of abnegation, resolves to sacrifice herself for   the happiness of her husband and Aglavaine. She leans so far out   of the embrasures of an old turret that a crumbling part of the   wall collapses and Sélysette falls, not into the sea as she   had thought, but onto the sand of the beach. Wounded, she is   carried to the house, and even on the verge of death she is   unselfish; wishing to spare them remorse, she tries to pretend to   Méléandre and Aglavaine that her fall from the tower   was accidental. In this drama in which delicately shaded states   of soul abound, all the characters are noble and generous. Both   Aglavaine and Méléandre feel that a happiness that is   purchased at the price of another’s suffering is fugitive and   vain and, if they do not feel less irresistibly drawn to one   another, they do not by any means yield to low desires but to a   powerful, spiritualized attraction. They struggle against fate, a   struggle all the more painful as they well suspect that fraternal   love will ultimately be impossible and that everything will lead   them to the complete union which they flee as a sin. These words   of Aglavaine are beautiful: «If somebody must suffer, it   should be us. There are a thousand duties, but I think one is   rarely mistaken in the attempt to relieve a weaker creature by   taking its suffering upon oneself» This play has a charm   which ranks it among the most beautiful poetic creations of the   century.
Aglavaine et Sélysette
, Maeterlinck’s masterpiece,   appeared in 1896. In 1902 the author published the drama of
Monna Vanna
, known and played even here in Sweden. The   action takes place against the historical background of the   Renaissance in Italy; its composition is very clear-cut and   entirely free from that kind of twilight which generally   characterizes Maeterlink’s art. The dramatic idea of duty which   sustains the action has often been disputed, with very diverse   opinions. The play is certainly bold and of great psychological   interest, but Maeterlinck is perhaps more himself in the short,   delicately symbolic plays in which the great, flooding light of   day does not hold sway but which open up marvellous perspectives   for the most intimate presentiments of the human heart.
Maurice Maeterlinck, a many-sided writer, has written works of a   philosophical nature, if not purely philosophical works. Such,   for example, is
Le Trésor des humbles
(1896) [
The   Treasure of the Humble
] which, among other interesting   studies, contains inspired pages about the mystic Ruysbrock and   about the spiritual life. Maeterlinck’s idealism finds a happy   expression here in his words on the most exalted poetry, which,   he says, aims at keeping open the principal paths which lead from   the visible to the invisible world. In many places in this book   appears the thought mentioned earlier that there is behind our   visible self another self which is our true being. This idea may   appear mystical to the empiricists; at bottom it is quite as   plausible as Kant’s doctrine of intelligibility which, after all,   is the source of the empirical character. In
Le Temple   enseveli
(1902) [
The Buried Temple
] is found the idea   of an invisible personality, the basis of the visible and earthly   personality. If, however, Maeterlinck is accused of fatalism, one   should remember the glowing optimism of his book
La Sagesse et   la destinée
(1893) [
Wisdom and Destiny
], in which   man’s fate is said to reside in himself and to depend on the way   in which he exercises his will. The downfall of great historical   personages is represented here as caused by their own faults or   originating from the fact that they lost their old confidence in   themselves through errors, and indeed through evil actions, and   thereby lost the strength to combat perils victoriously.
In 1900
La Vie des abeilles
[
The Life of the Bee
]   appeared. This book had strong repercussions. Although Maurice   Maeterlinck is an enthusiastic beekeeper and thoroughly familiar   with the life of the bees, he did not intend to write a   scientific treatise. His book is not an abstract of natural   history but an exuberantly poetic work abounding in reflections,   the sum total of which is almost a declaration of incompetence.   It is useless, the author seems to say, to inquire if the strange   cooperation among the bees, their apportionment of work, and   their social life are the product of a reasoning mind. It matters   little whether the term «instinct» or the term   «intelligence» is used, for they are but ways of   revealing our ignorance in the matter. What we call instinct   among the bees is perhaps of a cosmic nature, the emanation of a   universal soul. One immediately thinks of Virgil’s immortal   description of the bees in which he says that a thinker   attributes to them a share of
divina mens
, the divine   thought, the divine spirit.
L’Intelligence des fleurs
(1907) [
The Intelligence of   Flowers
], another of Maeterlinck’s works, is interesting for   its bold representation of plants as having wisdom and   self-interest. Here one finds the same richness of poetic   imagination and, occasionally, profound reflections.
With his creative force, which never runs dry, Maeterlinck   composed in 1903 the fascinating dramatic phantasy
Joyzelle
, which shows, through difficult trials and sombre   episodes, the triumph of love faithful to its own nature.
Marie Magdeleine
(1909) represents the change in the soul   of the repentant sinner and her victory over a temptation that   was all the stronger as it touched precisely the noblest side of   her nature and urged her to save the Messiah at the sacrifice of   herself and of the new moral life which he himself had created in   her; that is to say, at the sacrifice of the vital work of the   Messiah. Finally, we admire the spectacle
L’Oiseau bleu
(1909) [
The Blue Bird
], a profound fairy tale which   sparkles with the poetry of childhood, even if it seems to   include too much reflection to have quite enough naive   spontaneity. Alas! the blue bird of happiness exists only beyond   the limits of this perishable world, but those who have pure   hearts will never seek it in vain, for their emotional lives and   their imaginations will enrich them and purify them in their   journey across the countries of the land of dreams.
And so we return to the place we started from, the land of   dreams. Perhaps we would not be wrong in saying that for Maurice   Maeterlinck, all reality in time and space, even when it is not a   product of the imagination, always carries a veil woven of   dreams. Under this veil is hidden the real truth of existence,   and when the veil is lifted someday, the essence of things will   be discovered.
I have tried to give an account of Maeterlinck’s conception of   life, using his works as a guide. One cannot doubt the beauty and   nobility of this conception; moreover, it is presented in the   original form of a poetry that is strange and sometimes bizarre   but always inspired.
Maurice Maeterlinck belongs to the chosen ones in the field of   poetry. Tastes may change, but the charm of
Aglavaine et   Sélysette
will remain. Today Sweden, the land of sagas   and folk songs, offers her world prize to the poet who has made   us perceive the tender vibrations of the melody that is hidden in   the hearts of men.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
