Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1912
Nobel Prize in Literature 1912
Gerhart Hauptmann
- Gerhart Hauptmann
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1912
There is an old saying that times change   and men change with them. If we look back on past ages we   discover its truth. We, who are no longer young, have had the   opportunity in our bustling lives to experience the truth of the   saying, and every day confirms it anew. As far back as history   extends we find that new things emerged, but were not at first   recognized although they were to be important in the future. A   seed came alive and grew to magnificent size. Certain names in   contemporary science illustrate the discrepancy between modest   beginnings and later developments.
The same is true of dramatic poetry. This is not the place to   trace its development through twenty-five centuries. There is a   tremendous difference, however, between the satyr choruses of the   Dionysiac festivals, called tragedies because of the goat skins   worn by the chorus, and the demands the modern age makes on   dramatic poetry, and this difference indicates considerable   progress.
In our time Gerhart Hauptmann has been a great name in the field   of drama. He turned fifty recently; he is thus in his prime of   life and can look back on an exceptionally rich career as an   artist. He submitted his first work to the stage at the age of   twenty-seven. At the age of thirty he proved himself a mature   artist with his play
Die Weber
(1892) [
The   Weavers
]. This work was followed by others which confirmed   his reputation. In most of his plays he deals with conditions of   the low-class life which he had numerous occasions to study,   especially in his native Silesia. His descriptions are based on   keen observations of man and his milieu. Each of his characters   is a fully developed personality – there is not a trace of types   or clichés. Nobody even for a moment could doubt the   truthfulness of his observations; they have established Hauptmann   as a great realist. But he nowhere praises the life of these   so-called low characters. On the contrary, when one has seen or   read these plays and identified himself deeply with the   conditions they represent, he feels the need for fresh air and   asks how such misery can be abolished in the future. The realism   in Hauptmann’s plays leads necessarily to brighter dreams of new   and better conditions and to the wish for their fulfilment.
Hauptmann has also written dramas of a totally different nature:   he calls them «Märchendramen». Among them is the   delightful
Hanneles Himmelfahrt
(1893) [
The Assumption   of Hannele
], in which the misery of life and the bliss of   heaven emerge with such striking contrast. Among these plays is   also
Die versunkene Glocke
(1897) [
The Sunken   Bell
], the most popular of his plays in his own country. The   copy used by the Nobel Committee of the Swedish Academy bore the   stamp of the sixtieth impression.
Hauptmann has also distinguished himself in the genres of   historical drama and comedy. He has not published a collection of   his lyrical poems, but incidental poems in his plays bear witness   to his talent in this field.
In his early years he had published a few short stories, but in   1910 he brought out his novel
Der Narr in Christo Emanuel   Quint
[
The Fool in Christ: Emanuel Quint
], the result   of many years of work. The story «Der Apostel» of 1892   is a sketch of the final work in which we learn about the inner   life of a poor man who, without any education other than that   acquired from the Bible and without any critical judgment of what   he has read, finally reaches the conclusion that he is the   reincarnation of Christ. It is not easy to give a correct account   of the development of a human soul that can be considered normal,   in view of all the forces and circumstances that affect its   development. But it is even more difficult to attain the truth if   one describes the inner development of a soul that is in certain   respects abnormal. The attempt is bold; its execution took   decades of creative work. Judgment of the work has differed   widely. I am happy to join the many who consider
Emanuel   Quint
a masterly solution of a difficult problem.
Hauptmann’s particular virtue is his penetrating and critical   insight into the human soul. It is this gift that enabled him in   his plays and in his novels to create truly living individuals   rather than types representing some particular outlook or   opinion. All the characters we meet, even the minor ones, have a   full life. In his novels one admires the descriptions of the   setting, as well as the sketches of the people that come in more   or less close contact with the protagonist of the story. The   plays reveal his great art by their powerful concentration which   holds the reader or spectator from beginning to end. Whatever   subject he treats, even when he deals with life’s seamy side, his   is always a noble personality. That nobility and his refined art   give his works their wonderful power.
The preceding remarks were intended to sketch the reasons why the   Swedish Academy has awarded this year’s Nobel Prize to Gerhart   Hauptmann.
Dr. Hauptmann – In your significant and controversial book
Der   Narr in Christo Emanuel Quint
you say: «It is impossible   to uncover the necessary course of a human life in all its   stages, if only because every human being is something unique   from beginning to end and because the observer can comprehend his   object only within the limits of his own nature.»
That is indeed true. But there are many kinds of observers. The   everyday man in the midst of his bustling life has neither the   opportunity nor the will to study his fellow men in greater   depth. We see the outside but do not care to see beneath it   unless we happen to have a special interest in learning another’s   motives. Even those who are not drawn into the turmoil of present   life, who limit their intercourse with the outside world and are   on intimate terms with their immediate surroundings, do not   generally go very far in their study of the human soul. We are   attracted or repelled; we love or hate, if we are not   indifferent. We praise or blame.
The poet, however, is not an everyday man. He is able to extend   the scope of his imagination much further. For he has the divine   gift of intuition. And you, Dr. Hauptmann, possess this wonderful   gift to the highest degree. In your many works you have created   innumerable characters. But they do not exist merely as so many   types of such and such a nature. To the reader and spectator of   your plays, each of your characters is a fully developed   individual, living and acting together with others, but different   from all of them. That is the reason for much of the magic of   your work.
It has been said that at least in some of your works you have   been a marked realist. You have had rich opportunities to use   your gift of observation and become acquainted with the misery of   whole classes of people, and you have described it faithfully. If   after seeing or reading such a play one is deeply moved by it, he   cannot help thinking, «These conditions must be   improved.» One cannot deny the existence of the seamy side   of life, and it must have its place in literature in order to   teach wisdom to the living.
Your manifold activities as a writer have given us other   marvellous works. I shall mention only two here,
Hanneles   Himmefahrt
and
Die versunkene Glocke
. The latter seems   to enjoy great popularity in your country.
Through the mouth of the ambitious and unfortunate Michael Kramer   you say:
If someone has the effrontery to paint the man with the crown   of thorns – it will take him a lifetime to do it. No pleasures   for him: lonely hours, lonely days, lonely years. He must be   alone with himself and with his God. He must consecrate himself   daily. Nothing common must be about him or in him. And then when   he struggles and toils in his solitude the Holy Ghost comes. Then   he can sometimes catch a glimpse. It swells, he can feel it. Then   he rests in the eternal and he has it before him in quiet and   beauty. He has it without wanting it. He sees the Saviour. He   feels him.
Although in your work you have not represented the Saviour with   the crown of thorns, you have represented a poor man ultimately   driven to the delusion that he is the second Christ. But Kramer’s   words reflect your own attitude. Your novel
Der Narr in   Christo Emanuel Quint
appeared in 1910, but the story   «Der Apostel» of 1892 shows that the plan for writing   the novel had occurred to you twenty years earlier.
True art does not consist in writing down and handing to the   public the thoughts of the moment, but rather in subjecting   potentially useful ideas to close scrutiny, to the conflict of   different opinions and the apprehensive consideration of their   eventual effect. This process will gradually lead the true artist   to the precious conviction, «I have finally reached the   truth.» You have attained the highest rank of art by   painstaking but never pedantic preparatory research, by the   consistency of your feelings, thoughts, and actions, and by the   strict form of your plays.
The Swedish Academy has found the great artist Gerhart Hauptmann   worthy of receiving this year’s Nobel Prize, which his Majesty   the King will now present to him.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
