Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1915 - Presentation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1915
Nobel Prize in Literature 1915
Romain Rolland
Presentation
Presentation
- Romain Rolland
Presentation
The following account of the work of Romain   Rolland is by Sven Söderman, Swedish Critic
*
Romain Rolland was born on January 29,   1866, in the district of Nièvre. He studied literature,   music, and philosophy, and in 1895 he published two doctoral   theses:
Les Origines du théâtre lyrique moderne
,   an erudite and penetrating work which was awarded a prize by the   French Academy, and a Latin thesis,
Cur ars picturae apud   Italos XVI saeculi deciderit
, a study of the decline of   Italian painting in the sixteenth century. After several tiresome   years as a schoolmaster, he was appointed to the École   Normale as
maître de conférences
and thereafter   (1903) to the Sorbonne, where until 1910 he gave a remarkable   course on the history of music. In addition to his duties at the   university, he devoted himself to music criticism during these   years and acquired a wide reputation not only in France but all   over Europe when he published his articles and reviews in book   form under the titles
Musiciens d’autrefois
(1908)   [
Some Musicians of Former Days
] and
Musiciens   d’aujourd’hui
(1908) [
Musicians of Today
]. They reveal   him as a critic of great judgment, both fair and bold, without   prejudices or allegiance to any one party, and as one always   striving to reach through music the very sources of life. His   biographies of Beethoven (1903) and Händel (1910), inspired   as well as learned, are proof of his understanding of music.   Besides these, he has written equally remarkable biographies of   François Millet (1902), Michelangelo (1905-06), and Tolstoi   (1911), in which he has stressed the heroic character of the   lives and talents of these artists.
Rolland made his debut in pure literature in 1897 with a play in   five acts,
Saint-Louis
, which he published together with
Aërt
(1898) and
Le Triomphe de la raison
(1899), under the common title
Les Tragédies de la   foi
(1909) [Tragedies of Faith]. In these plays he sought to   set forth, under the mask of historical events, the miseries that   souls faithful to their ideals meet in their struggle with the   world. He also wrote
Théâtre de la   révolution
(1909), which includes
Le 14 Juillet
(1902),
Danton
(1900),
Les Loups
(1898) [
The   Wolves
], and a pacifist drama about the war in the Transvaal,
Le Temps viendra
(1903) [
The Time Will Come
]. The   plays about the Revolution were conceived during a period when   Rolland dreamed of a dramatic reform. He wanted to create a new   theatre, to free the art from the domination of a selfish clique,   and to entrust it to the people. He had previously outlined his   ideas in an essay called
Le Théâtre du peuple
(1900-03) [
The People’s Theatre
]. He tried to make his own   contribution to this new popular drama by describing the   principal episodes of the French Revolution and by representing   in a dramatic cycle the Iliad of the French nation. These dramas,   which seek moral truth at the sacrifice of anecdotal color,   reveal historical intuition, and their characters are fully   alive. They are very interesting to read and deserve to be   staged.
From 1904 to 1912 Rolland published his great novel
Jean-Christophe
, which is composed of a series of   independent narratives:
L’Aube
,
Le Matin
,
L’Adolescent
,
La Révolte
,
La Foire sur la   place
,
Antoinette
,
Dans la maison
,
Les   Amies
,
Le Buisson ardent
, and
La Nouvelle   Journée
[
Dawn, Morning, Youth, Revolt, The Market   Place, Antoinette, The House, Love and Friendship, The Burning   Bush, The New Dawn
]. In 1910 he resigned from his duties at   the University; since then he has devoted himself entirely to   writing, living most of the time in Rome and Switzerland. During   the war, he wrote a series of articles in Swiss newspapers; these   were subsequently published in a volume called
Au-dessus de la   mêlée
(1915) [
Above the Battle
]. In this, he   maintains that the future of mankind is superior to the interests   of nations. War for him is barbarous violence, and over the   bloody struggles of nations which seek power he turns our eyes   toward the cause of humanity. Rolland’s recent works are a novel,
Colas Breugnon
(1918), a dramatic fantasy,
Liluli
(1919), and a study of Empedocles (1917).
Romain Rolland’s masterpiece, for which he has received the Nobel   Prize in Literature in 1915, is
Jean-Christophe
. This   powerful work describes the development of a character in whom we   can recognize ourselves. It shows how an artistic temperament, by   raising itself step by step, emerges like a genius above the   level of humanity; how a powerful nature which has the noblest   and most urgent desire for truth, moral health, and artistic   purity, with an exuberant love of life, is forced to overcome   obstacles that rise up ceaselessly before it; how it attains   victory and independence; and how this character and this   intelligence are significant enough to concentrate in themselves   a complete image of the world. This book does not aim solely at   describing the life of the principal hero and his environment. It   seeks also to describe the causes of the tragedy of a whole   generation; it gives a sweeping picture of the secret labour that   goes on in the hidden depths and by which nations, little by   little, are enlightened; it covers all the domains of life and   art; it contains everything essential that has been discussed or   attempted in the intellectual world during the last decades; it   achieves a new musical aesthetic; it contains sociological,   political and ethnological, biological, literary, and artistic   discussions and judgments, often of the highest interest. The   artistic personality which is revealed in
Jean-Christophe
is one of rare resoluteness and strong moral structure. In this   work Rolland has not simply followed a literary impulse; he does   not write to please or to delight. He has been compelled to write   by his thirst for truth, his need for morality, and his love of   humanity. For him the purpose of the aesthetic life consists not   merely in the creation of beauty; it is an act of humanism.
Jean-Christophe
is a profession of faith and an example;   it is a combination of thought and poetry, of reality and symbol,   of life and dream, which attracts us, excites us, reveals us to   ourselves, and possesses a liberating power because it is the   expression of a great moral force.
In addition to the Romain Rolland who is concerned about truth   and altruism there is also the artist. He is a poet of great   scope. Although he has assigned the novel only to second place in   his work, his mastery of the genre is superb. The character study   of Jean-Christophe is an inspired creation, astonishing in   spontaneity, with individuality in every trait, every movement,   every thought.
Around this central, monumental figure, we find a whole series of   characters of great human interest. Rolland’s observation is   precise and profound. He penetrates to the depths of the beings   whom he describes; he studies their characters and paints their   souls with incomparable psychological art. His portraits of   women, especially, are masterpieces. His characters come from all   walks of life and are astonishingly true to type – the bourgeois,   the politician, the artist. Sometimes the descriptions are brief   but powerful sketches full of drama and pathos; sometimes they   are extended to form immense tableaux of manners that are   striking because of their keenness of vision and their singular   penetration. His innate sincerity prevents Rolland from using   rhetorical devices. He says in an exact and natural manner what   he has to say – and nothing more. But when his thought is   inflamed, when his heart is filled with emotion-love, anger,   enthusiasm, scorn, joy, or sadness – then a wind swells the   sentence and gives to the text a beauty that, before Rolland,   only the greatest masters of French prose have attained.
The author of
Jean-Christophe
is one of the most imposing   literary figures of the contemporary era; he is a mighty spirit   and an original poet. His masterpiece has taken its place in   world literature among the most original, the boldest, and the   healthiest works of our century.
The works of Romain Rolland (1866-1945)   written after the First World War continued to reflect all his   earlier interests. During the twenties he began another   «roman fleuve»,
L’Ame enchantée
(7 vols.,   1922-33) [
The Soul Enchanted
]. Music and the problem of   the artist are the subject of his
Beethoven: Les grandes   époques créatrices
(1928) [
Beethoven the   Creator
]. Rolland persisted in his quest for peace and was   attracted by the non-violence movement of Ghandi, about whom he   wrote a book (1924). His fascination with India and Buddhism led   to the study
Essai sur la mystique et l’action de L’Inde   vivante
(1929-30) [
Prophets of the New India
]. His   political ideas were increasingly influenced by socialism, as is   evident from his many essays. Other works of his later period are
Les Précurseurs
(1919) [
The Forerunners
],
Clerambault: histoire d’une conscience libre pendant la   guerre
(1920) [
Clerambault
],
Le Jeu de l’amour et   de la mort
(1925) [
The Game of Love and Death
], and
Péguy
(1944), the study of his boyhood friend.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
*
The Nobel Prize   in Literature 1915 was announced on November 9, 1916.
Romain Rolland died on December 30, 1944.
