Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1916 - Presentation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1916
Nobel Prize in Literature 1916
Verner von Heidenstam
Presentation
Presentation
- Verner von Heidenstam
Presentation
The following account of the work of Verner   von Heidenstam is by Sven Söderman, Swedish   Critic
In the constellation of original artists   who regenerated Swedish poetry at the end of the last century,   Verner von Heidenstam was the most brilliant star. He was the   leader of the generation of poets of 1890; he was the first to   set forth in theory and also to realize in his works the ideal of   new Swedish generations. Even in his first poems he opened new   paths for imagination and form; and his later collections are in   large part pure masterpieces of the lyric art. Not less   significant – but more impressive because of its great dimensions   – is his work in prose. Inspired by national subjects from the   very beginning, it succeeds in capturing the most genuine   characteristics of national life; it depicts the destinies of the   Swedish people in epic poems, which by the richness of their   imagination, the sharpness of their contours, and their   composition, are works of the highest order in Scandinavian   literature. No competent and impartial judge has ever questioned   the rare originality of his genius, and Heidenstam has long been   ranked among the masters of Swedish national literature.
Born in 1859 into an old family of the Swedish nobility, he first   wanted to be a painter, but he abandoned the study of painting to   devote himself to his vocation as a poet. His first collection of   poems, Vallfart och vandringsår (1888) [
Pilgrimage: The   Wander Years
], which contains predominantly Oriental themes,   marked an epoch in the modern literature of Sweden. In truth it   gave the final blow to the realistic school, enemy of all   imagination, which was then dominant in Sweden and which since   1880 had darkened literature with its sadness and its gloom. This   was the first manifestation of a new poetry in which free   individuals, led only by the logic of their imagination,   worshipped beauty for its own sake. This «renaissance»,   which a small polemical work (
Renässans
, 1889)   announced a little later, was already completely realized in   these poems, rich in colours and bold in form. They reaffirmed   the right of man to the naive pleasure of living and surprised   with their new rhythms and their poetic accents.
The Oriental poems which played so charmingly with colours and   forms had inaugurated a new era and had made the renewal of   Swedish poetry apparent to the eyes and to the imagination. In   the great prose-poem intermixed with verse,
Hans Alienus
(1892), the tragic Odyssey of an uprooted worshipper of beauty,   and especially in his
Dikter
(1895) [Poems] Heidenstam   opens perspectives to an inner life. The time of hymns to   voluptuousness is past; gravity and sadness are now persistent   moods. Sentiment and duty are appreciated at their just value and   what is firmly rooted in the depths of the human personality   finds itself intuitively explained. What is characteristic in   this conception of life, born of noble and unhappy experiences,   is a proud and tolerant virility which constitutes the very   essence of the suffering, the hope, and the intoxication of the   poet, and a newly acquired capacity to reach the spiritual world   by renunciation. An ample and profound imagination, genial   sentiment, and pure humanity fill these poems – which are also   admirable in the sense of form – and make Heidenstam a manly poet   and a master of the lyric genre.
A new aspect of Heidenstam’s development appeared in his   patriotic poetry. He had discovered early that love for the   ancestral hearth and for the home of one’s birth is what most   strongly links man to life. To this love he gave an intense   expression even in the poems of his youth; this love henceforth   linked him more closely to his country and to his people and   oriented his poetic genius toward the historic tales and memories   of Sweden. Compelled by such love, he summarized, in a cycle of   poems,
Ett folk
(1902) [
One People
], all that is   Swedish into a unity with the same rights and obligations for   those who enter therein; and his love finally suggested a   patriotic dream of grandeur and called forth this passionate   demand: «No people may be greater than you; that is the   goal, no matter what the cost.» A whole series of great   prose-poems bears witness to his patriotism. In
Karolinerna
(1897-98) [
The Charles Men
] he   describes, in the form of separate narratives, the inevitable   ruin of Swedish greatness through the act of Charles XII; with a   few quick strokes he sketches the tragic character of this   national hero and shows that in the end he was only the echo of   an ancient saga. In
Heliga Birgittas pilgrimsfärd
(1901) [
Saint Bridget’s Pilgrimage
] he gives a penetrating   explanation of this remarkable woman, suggesting that she quite   conscously sought sainthood but that she attained it   unconsciously when of her on will she divested herself of her   pride. Truly monumental are the two volumes of
Folkunga   Trädet
(1905-07) [
The Tree of the Folkungs
],
Folke Filbyter and Bjälboarvet
[
The BjäIbo   Inheritance
], which constitute the trunk and lower branches   of «the genealogical tree of the Folkungs», a great   historical prose epic in which he retraces the character of a   clan of chieftains and the destinies of the Swedes during a   period of the Middle Ages. Here the historical imagination of the   author, sustained by an inspiration forever fresh, follows all   threads in weaving the fates of his characters. His imagination,   with its symbolic visions, glistens before the eye.
While Heidenstam was working on this epic about the life and   character of the Swedes, his cult for man was taking shape, and   one finds traces of it in the work. This cult often includes the   necessity to renew life through sacrifice and to aspire to a more   elevated earthly existence, an idea which is opposed to love and   the cult of woman and results logically in the exaltations of   stories
Sankt Göran och draken
(1900) [St. George and   the Dragon] and
Skogen susar
(1904) [
The Forest   Whispers
]. This collection contains, in particular, the great   prose-poem «Herakles».
Beside these works, Heidenstam has published, among other things,   stories and memories of a trip,
Från Col di Tenda till   Blocksberg
(1888) [From Col di Tenda to Blocksberg]; the   novel
Endymion
(1889), Oriental to the core; the book of   historical lectures
Svenskarna och deras hövdingar
(1908-10) [
The Swedes and Their Chieftains
]; and the   collections
Tankar och teckningar
(1899) [Thoughts and   Notes] and
Dagar och händelser
(1909) [Days and   Occurrences]. In this last book he has notably treated subjects   of aesthetics and general culture.
The final aspect of Heidenstam’s concept of life is offered us   through his
Nya dikter
(1915) [New Poems], a collection   mainly of philosophical poems of an elevated humanity, of a   mellow wisdom, of a beauty of images strangely serene. In   loneliness men come to understand themselves; love is the bond   which should unite them, and creative humility is the great force   which builds the world and which raises statues of the   gods.
«O Man, you will become wise only when you reach the summit   of the evening-cool heights where all the earth is   beheld.»
The literary career of Verner von   Heidenstam (1859-1940) practically came to an end with the   publication of his
Nya dikter
. His only work of importance   after this date was his idealized autobiography
När   kastanjerna blommade
[When the Chestnuts Bloomed], which was   published posthumously in 1941. His collected works in 23 volumes   were published between 1943 and 1945.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
Verner von Heidenstam died on May 20, 1940.
