Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1919
Nobel Prize in Literature 1919
Carl Spitteler
- Carl Spitteler
Swedish Academy
, on December 10, 1920
*
The Swedish Academy, in accordance with the   statutes of the Nobel Founcation, has awarded the Nobel Prize in   Literature for 1919, which was not awarded last year, to the   Swiss poet Carl Spitteler for his epic,
Olympischer   Frühling
(1906) [Olympian Spring].
Of this work it can be truly said that its «significance has   become apparent only in recent years», and that all doubts   that prevented a full appreciation had to be carefully considered   until its merits, not immediately obvious, could be fully   recognized, not only as ornaments of the poetic form but above   all as the artistic and harmonious expressions of a superior   genius of rare independence and idealism.
This is not to say that we in any way subscribe to the opinion   that this poem represents the fruit of a persistent struggle with   the darkness of thought rather than of a lucid liberal   inspiration. The original gap between the poet’s art and its   appreciation by critics and readers does not in this case point   to a shortcoming on either side, but rather proves the deep and   rich meaning of the work, which needs careful critical judgment   to be revealed in its entirety.
Spitteler’s
Olympischer Frühling
achieved popularity   in Switzerland and Germany only in the revised final version of   1909. But with every year and especially since the end of the   war, interest in it has grown and its circle of readers has   widened; this year’s impression is expected to run into several   thousand copies. That is a considerable number for something as   out of step with the times as a verse epic of 600 pages about the   gods of Olympus, which, because of its genre, must be read as a   whole and which demands the leisure and concentration of the   reader. The writer, who has for decades devoted all his energies   to such an enterprise, has indeed deliberately and ruthlessly   isolated himself from hectic contemporary life and has given   little thought to the modern demand for adequate material   compensation.
He has done nothing to soften these contrasts. On the contrary,   he has intentionally chosen a subject and an approach which were   bound to bewilder and even repel many readers of different   dispositions and inclinations or of different backgrounds of   taste and education, as they tried to understand the poetic world   that he opened before their eyes. From the beginning he was bold   enough to appeal to their patience and endurance to follow him to   the end of his curious paths, illuminated only by the clear and   uninterrupted thread of the action and the soliloquies and   dialogues of the heroes, which are highly dramatic despite the   epic framework. The connoisseur recognizes Homeric traits, but to   his surprise he is led on toward an unknown and never anticipated   goal.
But for the rest, what a harsh and striking contrast between   Homer’s Olympus and Spitteler’s idiosyncratic mythology! Nothing   could be more unjust than the reproach that he likes to attract   philologists and other disciples of scholarship by means of   recondite allusions and profound symbols borrowed from their   disciplines. His Olympians and heroes, his myths and oracles only   rarely remind one of the style or tone of the older Greek poet   philosophers. They can neither be derived from the latest   findings of classical scholarship nor cited as evidence of the   poet’s dependence on any kind of allegorical interpretation.   Equally misguided are those who have spoken of a third part of
Faust
. Spitteler does not imitate anyone, not even the   aging Goethe in his attempt to reconcile Romantic passion and   classical balance in the masks of Faust and Helen. Spitteler’s   mythology is a purely personal form of expression which grew   naturally out of his education and which gives shape to the   living turmoil of struggling characters that he evokes in order   to represent on the level of ideal imagination, human sufferings,   hopes, and disillusions, the vicissitudes of different human   fortunes in the struggle of the free will against imposed   necessity. Why should he care that the current aesthetic   enlightenment finds it difficult to accept this seemingly   fantastic mixture of dream and reality with its wilful abuse of   mythological names?
Even if I attempted to give a careful and comprehensive summary   of the action of
Olympischer Frühling
, I could not   give a clear picture of the wealth of its content, of the radiant   vividness and moving power of the changing episodes, nor of their   firm interrelation in an effective whole. Suffice it to say that   the brilliant life of Olympus and the cosmos, manifesting itself   in pleasure and trials of strength, ends in impotent despair in   the face of human ingratitude, licence, crime, and misery.   Herakles, the mortal son of Zeus, equipped with all perfections   by his father, his relatives, and friends, but at the same time   burdened with the curse and hatred of Hera, the queen of the   gods, must leave Olympus to accomplish ungrateful tasks of pity   and courage on earth.
The Olympians, with their deeds and adventures, their victorious   fights and their quarrels among themselves are in reality   supermen whom the poet values only inasmuch as they are able to   curb their whims and desires.
«Der Weise zügelt, der Tor lässt Willkür   walten.» Above them all there is an inexorable universal law   that assumes shape in gloomy powers of fate. Below them and   closer to us are the mechanizing, soulless powers of nature which   gods and men should put into their service for the benefit of   themselves and of others, but which, abused by malice and pride,   drive them into folly and ruin. The epic is full of airships and   other curious inventions and its gorgeous buildings with cupolas   and stately porches leave Homeric simplicity far behind. But the   plot of the impudent flatfoot people to deprive Apollo of his   universal rule by means of an artificial sun and their   overweening attempt to attack him in the air by means of a   treacherously constructed vehicle and poison gas testify to the   decay that threatens mankind when it pushes too far a   self-confidence based on material power.
Spitteler describes such pranks and the strange quests and   enterprises of his heroes with a playful humour reminiscent of   Ariosto. His style has a great variety of tones and colors   ranging from solemn pathos to the careful brush strokes of the   similes and the lively descriptions of nature, which reflect his   native Alps rather than the regions of Greece. The iambic   hexameters with their alternating masculine and feminine rhymes   carry the flow of his masterly language, which is always powerful   and splendid, never without vitality, and often unmistakably   Swiss.
The Academy takes pleasure in expressing its admiration for the   independent culture of Spitteler’s poetry by awarding him this   Prize. Since Mr. Spitteler has been prevented by illness from   attending this ceremony, the Prize will be forwarded to him   through the Swiss Embassy.
At the banquet, Professor Oscar Montelius   addressed the Swiss Minister of Foreign Affairs, Count Wrangel,   who received the Prize for Carl Spitteler, and asked him to   inform the poet of the Academy’s concern for his health and of   the hope that he would soon be able to write other works as   remarkable as
Olympischer Frühling
.
* The Nobel Prize in Literature 1919 was   announced on November 11, 1920.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
