Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1920
Nobel Prize in Literature 1920
Knut Hamsun
- Knut Hamsun
Swedish Academy
, on December 10, 1920
In accordance with the statutes of the   Nobel Foundation, the Swedish Academy has awarded the literary   Prize for 1920 to the Norwegian novelist Knut Hamsun for his   work,
Markens Grøde
(1917) [
Growth of the   Soil
].
It would be superfluous to give a detailed account of a book that   in a short time has spread everywhere in its original form or in   translation. Through the originality of its plot and style, it   has aroused the liveliest interest in many countries and has   found favourable reception with the most diverse groups of   readers. Only recently a leading and distinctly conservative   English reviewer wrote that this book, which had appeared in   England only this year, was universally acclaimed as a   masterpiece. The reasons for this incontestable success will no   doubt hold the attention of literary critics for a long time, but   even now, under the impact of first impressions, they deserve to   be pointed out at least in their broad features.
In spite of current opinions of our time, those who want to find   in literature above all a faithful reproduction of reality, will   recognize in
Markens Grøde
the representation of a   life that forms the basis of existence and of the development of   societies wherever men live and build. These descriptions are not   distorted by any memories of a long, highly civilized past; their   immediate effect is due to the evocation of the harsh struggle   all active men must in the beginning endure (in varying external   conditions, of course) against an indomitable and rebellious   nature. It would be difficult to conceive of a more striking   contrast with works usually called «classic».
Nonetheless, this work may rightly be called classic, but in a   deeper and more profound sense than usual if this epithet is to   express something other and more than vague praise. The classic,   in the culture we have inherited from antiquity, is less the   perfect which calls for imitation than the significant which is   taken directly from life and which is rendered in a form of   enduring value even for future ages. The insignificant, that   which in itself is of no consequence, cannot be comprehended in   this notion any more than that which is formally provisional or   defective. But apart from that, whatever is precious in human   life, although it may appear common, can be placed in the same   category as the extraordinary and the brilliant, with a   significance and a form of equal value, once it is presented for   the first time in its proper light. In this sense it is no   exaggeration to maintain that in
Markens Grøde
Hamsun   has given to our times a classic that can be measured against the   best we already have. Antiquity does not possess in this respect   a monopoly inaccessible to future generations; for life is always   new and inexhaustible and as such can always be presented in new   forms created by new geniuses.
Hamsun’s work is an epic of labour to which the author has given   monumental lines. It is not a question of disparate labour which   divides men within and among themselves; it is a question of the   concentrated toil which in its purest form shapes men entirely,   which mollifies and brings together divided spirits, which   protects and increases their fruits with a regular and   uninterrupted progress. The labour of the pioneer and the first   farmer with all its difficulties, under the poet’s pen, thus   takes on the character of a heroic struggle that yields nothing   to the grandeur of the manly sacrifice for one’s country and   companions in arms. Just as the peasant poet Hesiod described the   labours of the field, so Hamsun has put in the foreground of his   work the ideal labourer who dedicates his whole life and all his   powers to clearing the land and to triumphing over the obstacles   with which men and the forces of nature confront him. If Hamsun   has cast behind him all the weighty memories of civilization, he   has by his own work contributed to a precise understanding of the   new culture that our era expects to arise from the progress of   physical labour as a continuation of ancient civilization.
Hamsun does not present so-called types on his stage. His heroes   and heroines are all very much alive, all in quite modest   circumstances. Certain among them, and the best, are   unimaginative in their goals and thoughts, the principal example   being the tireless and silent farmer himself. Others are   drifting, troubled, and often even bewildered by egoistic   aspirations and follies. They all carry the mark of their   Norwegian origin; they are all conditioned in some manner by   «the fruits of the earth». It is one of the   characteristics of our sister languages that often the same words   express very different nuances of meaning by the images they   evoke. When we Swedes speak of the «fruits of the   earth», we think immediately of something fertile, abundant,   succulent, preferably in an agricultural region that has been   cultivated for a long time. The thought of Hamsun’s book is not   oriented in this direction. «The earth» here is the   rugged and forbidding fallow soil. Its fruits do not fall from a   cornucopia of abundance; they comprise all that can germinate and   grow in this ungrateful soil, the good and the bad, the beautiful   and the ugly, among men and animals as well as in the forest and   the fields. Such are the kinds of fruits Hamsun’s work offers for   our harvest.
However, we Swedes, or at least many Swedes, do not feel strange   in the regions and circumstances described to us here. We   rediscover the atmosphere of the North with all that is a part of   its natural and social milieu, and with many parallels on both   sides of the frontier. Moreover, Hamsun also presents Swedish   characters who are drawn to the newly cultivated land, most of   them no doubt attracted by the mirage of brilliant economic   success, as the cities on the Norwegian coasts appear on the   horizon like snares of the great worldly life enticing   defenceless hearts from the heavy toil of the land.
These and other quite human projections, far from weakening,   reinforce the impression produced by the classic content of the   story. They dissipate the apprehension one could feel in seeing   the light of the ideal at the expense of truth; they guarantee   the sincerity of the design, the truth of the images and the   characters. Their common humanity escapes no one. The proof is in   the welcome this work has found among peoples of different   mentalities, languages, and customs. Furthermore, through the   light touch of smiling humour with which the author treats even   the saddest things he relates, he has proved his own compassion   for human destiny and human nature. But in the story, he never   departs from the most complete artistic serenity. The style,   stripped of vain ornaments, renders the reality of things with   certainty and clarity, and one rediscovers in it, under a   personal and powerful form, all the richness of nuance of the   writer’s mother tongue.
Mr. Knut Hamsun – In facing the rigours of the season as well as   the fatigues of a long trip particularly arduous at this time in   order to come to receive the Prize awarded you, you have given   great joy to the Swedish Academy, which will certainly be shared   by all the persons present at this ceremony. In the name of the   Academy, I have tried as well as possible in the short time   accorded me to express at least some of the major reasons for   which we appreciate so highly your work which has just been   crowned. Thus, in addressing myself now to you personally, I do   not wish to repeat what I have said. It remains for me only to   congratulate you in the name of the Academy and to express the   hope that the memories you will keep of your visit with us will   be ties that will link you to us also in the future.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
