Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1921
Nobel Prize in Literature 1921
Anatole France
- Anatole France
E.A. Karlfeldt
,   Permanent Secretary of the
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1921
Anatole France was no longer a young man   when, in 1881, he captured the attention of the literary public   in France and subsequently in the civilized world with his   curious novel,
Le Crime de Sylvestre Bonnard
. He had   behind him a long stretch of years during which his development   had been carried on without attracting wide attention. But if,   during this period of slow growth, his literary efforts had been   infrequent and not very energetic, the work to which he had   subjected his intellect, his thought, and his taste had been   proportionately wider and more vigorous. No immoderate desire for   fame moved him. Ambition seems to have played a small role in his   life. Indeed, he tells the story that at the age of seven he   wanted to be famous. Excited by the legends of saints told to him   by his good, pious mother, he wanted to settle in the desert and   as a hermit match the glory of St. Anthony and St. Jerome. His   desert was the
Jardin des Plantes
where the huge beasts   lived in houses and cages, and where God the Father seemed to him   to raise his arms to heaven blessing the antelope, the gazelle,   and the dove. His mother was frightened by such vanity but her   husband soothed her: «My dear, you will see that at twenty   he will be disgusted with fame.» «My father was not   mistaken», France says. «Like the King of Yvetot, I   lived quite well without fame and no longer had the least desire   to engrave my name on the memory of men. As for the dream of   becoming a hermit, I refashioned it every time I believed I felt   life was thoroughly bad; in other words, I refashioned it every   day. But every day nature took me by the ear and led me to the   amusements in which our humble lives pass away.» At the age   of fifteen the young Anatole France dedicated his first essay,   «La Légende de Sainte Radegonde, Reine de France»,   to his father and his beloved mother. This work is now lost, but   even much later, when his faith in saints had vanished, he was   still able to write legends with a pen dipped in the gold of   haloes.
The poet’s star seems to have been illuminated first in that   bright constellation bearing the name Anatole France. In the old   library of his worthy father, he soon felt a thirst for   knowledge, amidst the noble dust of old books. Into this shop,   whose proud sign «Aux Armes de France» inspired father   and son to take up the literary name, came collectors and   bibliophiles to examine the recently acquired treasures and to   discuss authors and editions. Thus the young Anatole, always a   good listener, was initiated into the mysteries of erudition, a   pursuit he considered the highest pleasure of a peaceful life. We   need only look at the Abbé Coignard, all beaming as he   leaves the grill room of the «Reine Pédauque»   where he pays for the material pleasures of this world by giving   some lessons to a young spit-turner and by dispensing the   treasures of an eloquence full of wisdom, irony, and Christian   faith; we see him turn toward the library to feast his spirit   free of charge on the latest books arrived from Holland, the   country of classical editions. And, bored with domestic tedium,   here is Mr. Bergeret, who comes to pass the finest hours of his   day in conversation with friends gathered around the library’s   display shelves. Anatole France is the poet of libraries and   bookworms. His imagination revels in the visions of bibliophiles,   as when he praises that marvellous
Astaracienne
, a giant   collection of books and manuscripts in which a noble cabalist   sought proofs to bolster his superstition. «More fervently   than ever», says Coignard toward the end of his adventurous   career, «I want to sit down behind a table, in some   venerable gallery, where many choice books would be assembled in   silence. I prefer their conversation to that of men. I have found   diverse ways of life and I judge that the best way is to devote   oneself to study, to support calmly one’s part in the   vicissitudes of life, and to prolong, by the spectacle of   centuries and of empires, the brevity of our days.» Love of   intellectual work is a fundamental characteristic of Anatole   France’s personal religion and just like his Abbé, he   prefers, from the height of the ivory tower of knowledge and   thought, to turn his gaze toward far-off times and countries. His   irony lives in the present, his devotion in the past.
Yet though our existence is fragile, beauty lives everywhere, and   for the writer it materializes in form and style. Anatole   France’s vast studies and great meditation have bestowed a rare   solidity on his work, but no less serious is the labour he has   devoted to the perfecting of his style. The language which he had   to shape is one of the noblest; French is the most richly endowed   daughter of the mother tongue Latin. It has served the greatest   masters. Now grave, now merry, it possesses serenity and charm,   strength and melody. In many places France calls it the most   beautiful language on earth and lavishes the most tender epithets   on it as to a beloved woman. But as a true son of the ancients,   he wishes it
simplex munditiis
. He is an artist, certainly   one of the greatest, but his art aspires to keep his language,   through severe purification, as simple and, at the same time, as   expressive as possible. In contemporary Europe, where flourishes   a superficial dilettantism, dangerous for the purity of   languages, his work is a richly instructive example of what art   can do with true resources. His language is the classical French,   the French of Fénélon and Voltaire, and rather than   contribute new ornaments to it, he gives it a slightly archaic   stamp which admirably suits his subjects, often taken from   antiquity. His French is so transparent that one would like to   apply to it what he said of Leila, daughter of Lilith, one of the   luminous and fragile beings sprung from his imagination: «If   crystal could speak, it would speak in this fashion.»
Let us recall now, for our own pleasure, some of the works which   have secured for the name of Anatole France the world-wide renown   which he has so little desired but which nevertheless he cannot   avoid. By so doing we will often encounter France himself, for he   is less inclined than most writers to hide behind his characters   and words.
He is recognized as a master of the tale, which he has made a   wholly personal genre, in which erudition, imagination, serene   charm of style, and depth of irony and passion combine to produce   marvellous effects. Who can ever forget his Balthazar? The Negro   King of Ethiopia comes to pay a visit to Balkis, the beautiful   Queen of Sheba, and soon wins her love. But shortly the fickle   queen forgets him to give herself to another. Wounded to death   physically and emotionally, Balthazar returns to his country to   devote himself to the highest wisdom of the seers, astrology.   Suddenly an astonishing and sublime light spreads over the   intense gloom of his passion. Balthazar discovers a new star and,   high in the heavenly concourse, the star speaks to him, and in   the light it sheds he joins with two neighbouring kings. No   longer can Balkis hold him. His soul is detached from   voluptuousness and he undertakes the pursuit of the star. The   star which spoke was no other than the star which led the Three   Wise Men to the manger at Jerusalem.
Another time France opens before our eyes a mother-of-pearl   casket filled with priceless jewels, chased by the hand of a   master of antiquity. We find in it the legend, slightly ironic   but most seductive, of Célestin and d’Amyers, of the old   hermit and the young faun singing together the Easter Alleluia,   the one exalting in the return of Christ and the other in the   return of the sun, worshippers communing in a single innocent   piety, reunited at last – under the alarmed eye of the historian   – in a single sacred tomb. This story shows us France in a realm   in which he delights, the realm between paganism and   Christianity, where twilight and dawn are mingled, where satyrs   meet with apostles, where sacred and profane animals wander,   where ample materials are found to exercise his fantasy, his   contemplation, and his spiritual irony in all its nuances. One   often does not know whether to call it fiction or reality.
Romantic chastity is celebrated in the legends of the saints   Oliverie and Liberette, Euphrosine and Scolastica. These are   pages taken from the chronicles of saints, literary pastiches   perhaps, executed with talent and a sense for the   miraculous.
Still another time France takes us to the pits outside of Sienna   where, in the spring twilight, a sweet barefooted Carmelite   narrates the story of St. Francis of Assisi and St. Claire, the   daughter of his soul, and that of the holy satyr who served   masters as different as Jupiter, Saturn, and the Galilean, a   profound if hardly edifying legend, but recounted by France in   the most exquisite style.
In his famous novel Thaïs (1890) he enthusiastically   penetrates the Alexandrine world at the time when the scourging   thorns of Christianity were ravaging among the last effeminate   survivors of Hellenic civilization. Asceticism and voluptuousness   are at their heights here, mysteries and aesthetic orgies flower   side by side, angels and demons incarnate press around the   Fathers of the Church and the neo-Hellenic philosophers,   disputing over human souls. The story is steeped in the moral   nihilism of that era, but it includes beautiful passages such as   the magnificent descriptions of the desert solitude in which the   anchorites preach from atop their columns or are subject to   nightmares in the mummies’ tombs.
However, one must put
La Rôtisserie de la Reine   Pédauque
(1893) [
At the Sign of the Reine   Pédauque
] in the first rank of Anatole France’s novels.   There he has sketched a group of true-to-life characters,   legitimate or natural offspring of his mind in their own   colourful world. The Abbé Coignard is so alive that one can   study him as a real character who reveals all his complexity only   when one has penetrated his privacy. Perhaps others have had the   same experience I had. At first I had but little sympathy for   this clumsy, loquacious priest and doctor of theology, who has so   little concern for his dignity that sometimes he even steals or   commits other equally heinous crimes, which he nevertheless   defends with shameless casuistry. But he improves on better   acquaintance, and I have learned to love him. He is not only a   brilliant sophist, but an infinitely amusing character who   exercises his irony not only on others but also on himself. There   is profound humour in the contrast between his lofty views and   his shabby life, and one must regard him with the smiling   tolerance of his creator. Coignard is one of the most remarkable   figures in contemporary literature. He is a new and vigorous   plant in the Rabelaisian vineyard.
A type at once grotesque and lovable is the cabalist of Astarac.   The crude mystic evidently must be included in a novel dealing   with eighteenth-century manners. But the beings this magician   evokes are of a singularly ethereal species; freed of earthly   bonds, he enjoys the sweet and useful society of salamanders and   sylphs. As proof of the talents of these beings, d’Astarac tells   how once a sylph obliged a French scholar by arranging delivery   of a message to Descartes, who was then living in Stockholm where   he was teaching philosophy to Queen Christine. Sworn enemy of   superstition that he may be, Anatole France should be grateful to   that superstition for all the happy suggestions it has given him   for his work.
Admirably rendered is the accent of pious simplicity with which   the Abbé’s student, the young spit-turner, recounts all   these turbulent events. When his master, revered despite   everything, after having suffered to his last moments the assault   of the powers of darkness, finally dies a holy death in a Church   he had never ceased to recognize openly, the student traces in   Latin an ingenuous epithet praising the Abbé’s wisdom and   virtues. The author himself, in a later work, delivers an   obituary eulogy for his principal hero. Presenting him as a blend   of an Epicurean with a St. Francis, one who scorned men tenderly,   France speaks of his benevolent irony and his merciful   scepticism. Aside from the religious aspect, this   characterization applies equally well to Anatole France   himself
Let us accompany him then without fear in his philosophical   strolls in the garden of Epicurus. He will teach us humility. He   will say to us: the world is infinitely large and man is   infinitely small. What do you imagine? Our ideals are luminous   shades but it is in following them that we find our only true   happiness. He will say that human mediocrity is widespread, but   he will not exclude himself from it. We may reproach him for the   sensuality that occupies too large a place in some of his works   and for the hedonistic sentiments, for example, which he   describes under the sign of the red lily of Florence, and which   are not made for serious minds. He will reply, according to the   maxims of his spiritual father, that the pleasures of the mind   surpass by far those of the flesh, and the serene calm of the   soul is the port into which the wise man steers his boat in order   to escape the tempests of sensual life. We shall hear him express   the wish that time, which deprives us of so many things, may   allow us compassion for our fellow man, so that in our old age we   do not find ourselves shut up as in a tomb.
Following this inclination Anatole France left his aesthetic   seclusion, his «ivory tower», to throw himself into the   social fray of his time, to clamour like Voltaire for the   restoration of the rights of persons unjustly condemned as well   as of his own wounded patriotism; and he has gone into the   workers’ quarters to look for means of reconciling classes and   nations. His old age has not become a walled tomb. The end has   been good for him. After having been accorded many sunny years at   the court of the Graces, he still throws the glint of gay   learning into the idealistic struggle that, at an advanced age,   he wages against the decadence of societies and against   materialism and the power of money. His activity in this regard   does not interest us directly, but we obtain from it the   inestimable advantage of being able to fix his literary image   against the background of a lofty nobility of sentiments. There   is nothing of the careerist about him. His much discussed work on   Joan of Arc, which has cost him enormous toil and which was   intended to tear the veil of mysticism from the inspired heroine   of France and to restore her to nature, to real life, was a   thankless enterprise in an era prepared to canonize her.
«The Gods are Athirst!» The great drama of the   Revolution unfolds and, as with the battle of ideas, the trivial   destinies of men are reflected in blood. Do not believe, however,   that France would wish to present this squaring of accounts as   being definitive. A century is far too short a period of time to   permit delineating distinctly the march of men toward more   tolerance and humanity. How have events fulfilled his   predictions! Several years after the appearance of this book the   great catastrophe occurred. What beautiful arenas have been   prepared now for the games of salamanders! The smoke of battles   still hangs over the earth. And out of the fog surge gnomes,   sinister spirits of the earth. Are these the dead who return?   Sombre prophets announce a new revelation. A wave of superstition   threatens to flood the ruins of civilization. Anatole France   wields the subtle and corrosive weapon which puts to flight the   ghosts and the false saints. For our times, faith is infinitely   necessary – but a faith purified by healthy doubts, by the spirit   of clarity, a new humanism, a new Renaissance, a new   Reformation.
Sweden cannot forget the debt which, like the rest of the   civilized world, she owes to French civilization. Formerly we   received in abundance the gifts of French Classicism like the   ripe and delicate fruits of antiquity. Without them, where would   we be? This is what we must ask ourselves today. In our time   Anatole France has been the most authoritative representative of   that civilization; he is the last of the great classicists. He   has even been called the last European. And indeed, in an era in   which chauvinism, the most criminal and stupid of ideologies,   wants to use the ruins of the great destruction for the building   of new walls to prevent free intellectual exchange between   peoples, his clear and beautiful voice is raised higher than that   of others, exhorting people to understand that they need one   another. Witty, brilliant, generous, this knight without fear is   the best champion in the sublime and incessant war which   civilization has declared against barbarism. He is a marshal of   the France of the glorious era in which Corneille and Racine   created their heroes.
Today, as we in our old Germanic country award the world prize of   the poets to this Gallic master, the faithful servant of truth   and beauty, the heir of humanism, of the lineage of Rabelais,   Montaigne, Voltaire, Renan, we think of the words he once spoke   at the foot of Renan’s statue – his profession of faith is   complete in them: «Slowly but surely humanity realizes wise   men’s dreams.»
Mr. Anatole France – You have inherited that admirable tool, the   French language, the language of a noble and classical nation,   which is reverently guarded by the famous academy you adorn and   is maintained by it in an enviable condition of purity. You have   that brilliant tool of piercing sharpness, and in your hand it   acquires a scintillating beauty. You have used it masterfully to   cut out
chefs-d’oeuvre
very French in their style and   refinement. But it is not your art alone that charms us: we   revere your creative genius as well, and we have been enticed by   the generous, compassionate heart which so many exalted pages of   your works reveal.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
