Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1922
Nobel Prize in Literature 1922
Jacinto Benavente
- Jacinto Benavente
Swedish Academy
, on December 10, 1922
Jacinto Benavente has devoted his   imaginative gifts mainly to the theatre, and it seems as if he   has systematically guided the course of his development in this   direction through many varieties of experience. But with this   imaginative artist, system seems to be a free and direct   expression of his whole being. It appears that no one could have   reached his goal with less effort and brooding in comparison with   the value of the achievement.
The feeling which has carried him on has also been of an   unusually complete and harmonious nature: it is not only the   dramatic art and the atmosphere of the theatre that he has loved;   he has cherished an equally warm affection for life outside, for   the world of realities which it was his task to bring to the   stage. It is not a matter of mere uncritical and superficial   worship of life. He has observed his world with extremely clear   and keen eyes, and what he has seen he has measured and weighed   with an alert and flexible intelligence. He has not allowed   himself to be duped either by men or by ideas, not even by his   own ideas or his own pathos. Nevertheless, he does not strike one   as being in the least bitter, or even blasé.
His writing has thus obtained its most distinctive quality –   grace. This is such a rare value, especially in our own times,   that there is little demand for it on the market and it is not   recognized by most people. Grace, however, is as precious as it   is uncommon. It is the token of the balance of powers, of the   self-discipline and assurance of art, especially when it is not   an end in itself and a mere frivolity, but when, without apparent   effort, it stamps its mark on the entire form-giving process. It   does not, then, merely play on the surface, affecting the style;   it also determines each proportion in the treatment of the   subject and every line in its depiction.
This is precisely the case with Benavente. The effect he attains   may vary greatly in strength, but it is based on unfailing tact   and strict loyalty to the subject. He gives what the subject is   able to give without effort and without bombast. The fare he   provides may be more or less rich and interesting, but it is   always unadulterated. This is a classic feature in   Benavente.
Nevertheless, his bent is above all realistic, if we eliminate   from that label all the customary flavour of social tendency,   commonplace philosophy, or gross striving for effect. To   reproduce the wealth and mobility of life, the play of   characters, and the struggle between wills, in a way that comes   as near truth as possible – that is his chief aim. When he aims   at something beyond this – to stimulate thought, to solve   problems, to demolish prejudices, to enlarge human sympathy – he   does so with the most scrupulous care not to tamper with the   objective accuracy of the literary description. He exercises this   unusual discipline even when he is faced with the strongest   temptation for a dramatist – dramatic and scenic effect. However   easily a scene could be made more telling by increasing the   tension of the conflict and plot, by putting on more flaring   colours, by flogging up the emotions to their highest pitch,   Benavente never does this at the expense of truth: he permits no   blurring of the tone. He is a rare example of a born dramatist,   one whose imagination, by itself, creates in accordance with the   laws of the stage, but yet avoids anything theatrical as fully as   all other false conventions.
His activity lies especially in comedy, but that term in Spanish   is more inclusive than with us; it comprises what we may in   general call middleclass plays without tragic conclusions. If   there is such a conclusion, the pieces are called dramas, and   Benavente has also written such plays, including the remarkable   and moving play,
La Malquerida
(1913) [The Wrongly Loved].   He has also composed many romantic and fantastic pieces, among   which are exquisite achievements of poetic art, especially on a   small scale.
But his central significance lies in his comedies, which, as we   have seen, may well be as serious as they are gay; and in the   short forms of comedy, which in Spanish literature have been   developed into special species with old and glorious traditions.   In the latter Benavente is an enchanting master because of his   unlaboured wit and comic verve, his radiant good nature, and his   grace, which combines all these qualities. I have time for only a   few names:
De pequeñas causas
(1908) [For Small   Reasons];
El amor asusta
(1907) [Love Frightens];
No   fumadores
(1904) [Smoking Prohibited]. But there are many   others, an entire treasury of merry jest, where the battle is   waged so lightly and so elegantly that it is always   good-tempered, however sharp the weapon itself may be.
In the larger works we encounter an amazing range of spheres of   life and subject matter. They are taken from peasant life, from   all circles of society in the town, from the artist’s world down   to the travelling circus people whom the poet embraces with a   strong human sympathy and whom he values more highly than many   other classes.
But it is mainly the life of the upper classes that he has   treated in its two characteristic centres, Madrid and Moraleda,   the latter a place not found on the map, but which in its sunny   and alluring variety comprises the typical features of a   provincial town in Castile. In La farándula (1897) [The   Company of Comedians] the ambitious politician goes to this town   in order to rally and to gain the support of the uncorrupted   energies of the people for a somewhat vaguely defined ideal; in   the play
La Gobernadora
(1901) [The Governor’s Wife],   conceited ambition dreams of a larger stage for its greater   talents. Moraleda is really a planetary world, which is attracted   and illuminated by Madrid and does not reveal the full force of   its comedy except in comparison with Madrid.
The capital and its spiritual content are made understandable   much more fully through personal vicissitudes of fortune which   are determined, as are its fashions and its culture, by the   strata of its society. We see a distinct development in the art   of Benavente. He begins by stressing the description of   environment, with an abundant wealth of colour and life and   features that reveal character. The dramatic element proper –   unsought, like all the rest of the apparatus – exists for the   most part merely to keep the action going. Its function is to   arrange the whirl of life in a picture, composed in groups, with   strong individual scenes. He has taken pains to create a faithful   and artistic mirror of reality, which is then left to speak for   itself.
Later his composition becomes more rigid. Although it is arranged   firmly around a stronger, deeper, and more spiritual dramatic   conflict, it is, nevertheless, almost as simple as when Benavente   was merely writing episodes describing society. There is nothing   artificial, nothing abstract and isolated, in the human fates   which are represented. As before, they are still connected with   the world around them, but the light is strictly limited,   revealing only what is central from a dramatic point of view. The   sharp characterization is carried just far enough to make the   action clear; the psychology is merely a means, not an end.   Nothing is laboriously prepared beforehand; nothing strikes one   really as being prepared at all: every feature in the action   comes, as it were, with the improvisation of life and may take   one by surprise until one has reflected for a moment, just as   happens in life itself. The technique, too, is purely realistic   and has not searched for models in ancient tragedy. Summing up   the past is not the main function of this kind of drama, nor is   the dialogue a kind of cross-examination to discover the past.   The required discoveries are made by life itself by means of the   unforced course of the action.
Broadly speaking, Benavente does not seek to harrow the   spectator; his object is a solution of conflicts that is   harmonious even in melancholy and sorrow. This harmony is usually   gained by resignation, not weary or aloof or pathetic, and   without great gestures. The characters suffer, tear at their   bonds, are attracted by fortune (the way to which is to pass over   others’ fortune), wrestle in conflicts, measure their world and   themselves, and gain a clearer and wider vision through their   constraint. hat which has the last word is not passion, in fact   not the ego at all, but the spiritual value that proves so great   that, were it lost, the ego would be poor and fortune empty. The   decision is made without capitulation, merely through the fact   that the personality is face to face with the consequences of its   choice of fate and chooses freely, on the basis of instinctive   feeling rather than in accordance with theories.
I have time for only one or two titles of his strange, simple,   and quiet dramas:
Alma triumfante
(1902) [Conquering   Soul],
La propria estimacion
(1915) [Self-respect], and
Campo de armiño
(1916) [The White Scutcheon]. There   are many others of equal value which are more or less like these.   he distinctive mark of them all is a peculiarly pure humanity,   which at first glance is surprising in the keen and flashing   satirist, while the moderation and the freedom from all   sentimentality in the mode of expression are in complete   accordance with his schooling. As a matter of fact his qualities   go well together: as his grace of form is a classic feature, so   are his feeling and his insight classic, strictly schooled, well   balanced, farsighted, and clear. His simplicity of expression and   hushed tone come from the same source.
Nevertheless, Teutonic readers are often reminded, even when it   comes to an art as good as this, that it has sprung from a   national temperament other than ours and from other poetic   traditions. The kind of lyric we desire, at least in the   atmosphere of the world of drama, is on the whole probably   unknown to the Romance nations. Half-light, both in nature and in   the human soul, is lacking in them: all that human beings contain   is expressed, or it seems that it
can
be expressed. Their   thoughts may have brilliance, rapidity, and, of course, clarity;   but they strike us as lacking in power, as belonging to a   somewhat more vacant atmosphere, and as having less life in their   inner being. What southerners say of our art may reveal equally   great defects; but we must mutually accustom ourselves to admire   what we understand and to leave outside our aesthetic judgments   things which, for the reasons mentioned, fail to satisfy   us.
In the works in which the Spaniard Benavente has abandoned his   comedy descriptive of society and individuals, and instead has   ranged over larger complexes of ideas and has sought to interpret   all the unrest and yearning of our times, we cannot follow him   with the admiration that has been bestowed upon trim by his   countrymen. This is true of
El collar de estrellas
(1915)   [The Belt of Stars] and several other pieces.
I have not dwelt on the limitations of his art, but sought to   indicate the central qualities of his craftsmanship in his   country and in his time. I believe that scarcely any other   contemporary dramatist has anywhere captured the life about him   in such a many-sided and faithful manner and given it a form so   immediate and, through its simple and noble art, so durable. The   traditions of Spanish poetry comprise a strong, bold, and sound   realism, a prolific power of growth, and an inimitable charm in   the comic spirit which is merry and built on realities, not on   conversational wit. Benavente has shown that he belongs to this   school and, in a form peculiar to himself, has worked out a   modern comedy of character containing much of the classic spirit.   He has proved himself to be a worthy adherent of an ancient and   elevated style of poetry; and that is to say a great deal.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
