Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1923
Nobel Prize in Literature 1923
William Butler Yeats
- William Butler Yeats
Swedish Academy
, on December 10, 1923
Very early, in the first bloom of youth,   William Butler Yeats emerged as a poet with an indisputable right   to the name; his autobiography shows that the inner promptings of   the poet determined his relations to the world even when he was a   mere boy. He has developed organically in the direction indicated   by his emotional and intellectual life from the very   beginning.
He was born in an artistic home – in Dublin – thus beauty   naturally became a vital necessity for him. He showed artistic   powers, and his education was devoted to the satisfying of this   tendency; little effort was made to secure traditional schooling.   He was educated for the most part in England, his second   fatherland; nonetheless his decisive development was linked to   Ireland, chiefly to the comparatively unspoiled Celtic district   of Connaught where his family had their summer home. There he   inhaled the imaginative mysticism of popular belief and popular   stories which is the most distinctive feature of his people, and   amidst a primitive nature of mountain and sea he became absorbed   in a passionate endeavour to capture its very soul.
The soul of nature was to him no empty phrase, for Celtic   pantheism, the belief in the existence of living, personal powers   behind the world of phenomena, which most of the people had   retained, seized hold of Yeats’s imagination and fed his innate   and strong religious needs. When he came nearest to the   scientific spirit of his time, in zealous observations of the   life of nature, he characteristically concentrated on the   sequence of various bird notes at daybreak and the flight of   moths as the stars of twilight were kindled. The boy got so far   in his intimacy with the rhythm of the solar day that he could   determine the time quite exactly by such natural signs. From this   intimate communion with the sounds of morning and nighttime, his   poetry later received many of its most captivating traits.
He abandoned his training in the fine arts soon after he had   grown up in order to devote himself to poetry, for which his   inclination was strongest. But this training is evident   throughout his whole career, both in the intensity with which he   worships form and personal style and, still more, in the   paradoxically audacious solution of problems in which his acute   but fragmentary philosophical speculation sought its way to what   he needed for his own peculiar nature.
The literary world he entered, when he settled down in London at   the end of the eighties, did not offer him much positively, but   it at least offered him fellowship in opposition, which to   pugnacious youth seems particularly dear. It was filled with   weariness and rebellion toward the spirit of the times which had   prevailed just before, namely that of dogmatic natural science   and naturalistic art. There were few whose hostility was so   deeply grounded as that of Yeats, altogether intuitive,   visionary, and indomitably spiritualistic as he was.
He was disturbed not only by the cocksureness of natural science   and the narrowness of reality-aping art; even more, he was   horrified by the dissolution of personality and the frigidity   which issued from scepticism, by the desiccation of imagination   and emotional life in a world which at best had faith only in a   collective and automatic progression to the sacred land of   Cockaigne. Events proved him to be terribly right: the   «paradise» which could be reached by humanity with such   schooling, we have now the dubious advantage of enjoying.
Even more beautiful kinds of social utopianism, represented by   the greatly admired poet William Morris, did not captivate such   an individualist as young Yeats. Later he found his way to the   people, and then not as an abstract conception, but as the Irish   people, to whom he had been close as a child. What he sought in   that people was not the masses stirred by present day demands,   but an historically developed soul which he wished to arouse to   more conscious life.
In the intellectual unrest of London, things nationally Irish   remained dear to Yeats’s heart; this feeling was nurtured by   summer visits to his homeland and by comprehensive studies of its   folklore and customs. His earlier lyrics are almost exclusively   built on his impressions from these. His early poems immediately   won high esteem in England because the new material, with its   strong appeal to the imagination, received a form which, despite   its special characteristics, was nevertheless linked closely with   several of the noblest traditions of English poetry. The blending   together of Celtic and English, which had never been successfully   effected in the political sphere, became a reality here in the   world of poetic imagination – a symptom of no small spiritual   significance.
However much Yeats had read of English masters, his verse has a   new character. The cadence and the colours have changed, as if   they had been moved to another air – that of the Celtic twilight   by the sea. There is a greater element of song than is usual in   modern English poetry. The music is more melancholy, and, under   the gentle rhythm, which for all its freedom moves as securely as   a sleepwalker, we have a hint of yet another rhythm with the slow   breathing of the wind and the eternal pulse of the powers of   nature. When this art reaches its highest level it is absolutely   magical, but it is seldom easy to grasp. It is indeed often so   obscure that an effort is needed to understand it. This obscurity   lies partly in the mysticism of the actual subject, but perhaps   just as much in the Celtic temperament, which seems to be more   distinguished by fire, delicacy, and penetration than by   clearness. But no small part may have been played by the   tendencies of the time: symbolism and
l’art pour l’art
,   chiefly absorbed by the task of finding the boldly appropriate   word.
Yeats’s association with the life of a people saved him from the   barrenness which attended so much of the effort for beauty that   marked his age. Around him as the central point and leader arose,   within a group of his countrymen in the literary world of London,   that mighty movement which has been named the Celtic Revival and   which created a new national literature, an Anglo-Irish   literature.
The foremost and most versatile poet of this group was Yeats. His   rousing and rallying personality caused the movement to grow and   flower very quickly, by giving a common aim to hitherto scattered   forces or by encouraging new forces previously unconscious of   their existence.
Then, too, the Irish Theatre came into existence. Yeats’s active   propaganda created both a stage and a public, and the first   performance was given with his drama
The Countess Cathleen
(1892). This work, extraordinarily rich in poetry was followed by   a series of poetic dramas. all on Irish subjects drawn mainly   from the old heroic sagas. The most beautiful among these are
Deirdre
(1907), the fateful tragedy of the Irish Helen;
The Green Helmet
(1910), a merrily heroic myth of a   peculiarly primitive wildness; and above all
The King’s   Threshold
(1904), where the simple material has been   permeated by thought of a rare grandeur and depth. The quarrel   about the place and rank of the bard at the king’s court here   gives rise to the ever-burning question as to how much spiritual   things are to hold good in our world, and whether they are to be   received with true or false faith. With the claims on which the   hero stakes his life, he defends in the supremacy of poetry all   that makes the life of man beautiful and worthy. It would not   become all poets to put forward such claims, but Yeats could do   so: his idealism has never been dulled, nor has the severity of   his art. In these dramatic pieces his verse attains a rare beauty   and sureness of style.
Most enchanting, however, is his art in
The Land of Heart’s   Desire
(1894), which has all the magic of fairy poetry and   all the freshness of spring, in its clear but as it were dreamy   melody. Dramatically, also, this work is one of his finest; and   it might be called the flower of his poetry, had he not also   written the little prose drama
Cathleen ni Hoolihan
(1902), which is at once his simplest folk play and his most   classically perfect work.
Here more powerfully than anywhere else he touches the patriotic   string. The subject is Ireland’s struggle for liberty throughout   the ages, and the chief personage is Ireland herself,   impersonated by a wandering beggar woman. But we hear no simple   tone of hatred, and the profound pathos of the piece is more   restrained than in any other comparable poem. We hear only the   purest and highest part of the nation’s feeling; the words are   few and the action the simplest possible. The whole thing is   greatness without a touch of affectation. The subject, having   come to Yeats in a dream, has retained its visionary stamp of   being a gift from above-a conception not foreign to Yeats’s   aesthetic philosophy.
Much more might be said of Yeats’s work, but it must suffice to   mention the ways followed by his dramas of recent years. They   have often been romantic by virtue of their strange and uncommon   material, but they have generally striven after classic   simplicity of form. This classicism has been gradually developed   into bold archaism; the poet has sought to attain the primitive   plasticity found in the beginning of all dramatic art. He has   devoted much intensive, acute thought to the task of emancipating   himself from the modern stage, with its scenery that disturbs the   picture called up by the imagination, with its plays whose   features are necessarily exaggerated by the footlights, with its   audience’s demand for realistic illusion. Yeats wishes to bring   out the poem as it was born in the poet’s vision; he has given   form to this vision following Greek and Japanese models. Thus he   has revived the use of masks and has found a great place for the   actors’ gestures to the accompaniment of simple music.
In the pieces thus simplified and brought to a strict stylistic   unity, whose subjects are still taken by preference from the hero   legends of Ireland, he has sometimes attained a fascinating   effect, even for the mere reader, both in the highly compressed   dialogue and in the choruses with their deep lyrical tone. All   this, however, is in its period of growth, and it is not yet   possible to decide whether the sacrifices made are fully   compensated for by what has been gained. These pieces, though in   themselves highly noteworthy, will probably find greater   difficulty in becoming popular than the earlier ones.
In these plays as well as in his clearest and most beautiful   lyrics, Yeats has achieved what few poets have been able to do:   he has succeeded in preserving contact with his people while   upholding the most aristocratic artistry. His poetical work has   arisen in an exclusively artistic milieu which has had many   perils; but without abjuring the articles of his aesthetic faith,   his burning and questing personality, ever aiming at the ideal,   has contrived to keep itself free from aesthetic emptiness. He   has been able to follow the spirit that early appointed him the   interpreter of his country, a country that had long waited for   someone to bestow on it a voice. It is not too much to call such   a life’s work great.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
