Enhanced Page Navigation
Nobel Prize in Literature 1924 - Presentation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1924
Nobel Prize in Literature 1924
Władysław Reymont
Presentation
Presentation
- Władysław Reymont
Presentation
Critical Essay
*
by Per   Hallström, Chairman of the Nobel Committee of the
Swedish   Academy
This Polish work of imagination has its   starting point in the naturalistic novel, especially in the form   which that genre received from Zola in France. Reymont has   acknowledged that the idea of his book was evoked by
La   Terre
, not through his admiration of it, but through the   indignation and opposition it provoked. He found in it a   conventionalized, distorted, and coarse characterization of the   class of society in which he had grown up and which he loved with   all the warmth that had been cherished by his childhood memories.   He knew this class of society from abundant experience, from   within, and with full understanding – not, like Zola, merely   through hasty journalistic studies made in accordance with a   program mapped out beforehand with preconceived results; and he   wished to describe it in its reality, without any distortion   through theories. But Zola had a decisive influence on the work   in a quite different and more positive fashion.
Chlopi
(1904-09) [
The Peasants
], in the final form in which we   have it, would hardly be conceivable without the lessons that   Reymont learned from Zola’s work as a whole – its searching   description of the environment, its orchestral mass effects, its   uncompromising verism, and the harmonious working together of   external nature and human life. Nevertheless
Chlopi
,   rather than turning out to be a naturalistic novel, has taken on   epic proportions – certainly naturalistic in method but epic in   scope.
For us moderns that which most profoundly marks a narrative poem   as an epic, is a certain completeness and harmony, a general   impression of rest, however the various episodes may be charged   with suffering and struggle. It is not easy to express this   effect in a conceptual form, for it is our feelings that perceive   it. It achieves its results mainly from the fact that all the   elements of strife and unrest are gradually smoothed out before   us, like waves that wrestle with one another; the circles never   reach as far as the tranquil horizon that bounds the poem; the   unrest puts no question and sends no lament beyond that limit.   The world that we have before our eyes is a definite one and is   unshakable in its foundations; but it is not a world of   compulsion and imprisonment. It is wide enough for human beings   to express themselves in action according to the measure of their   powers. Hence the harmony of the poem. Whatever happiness is   recorded, the most irremediable suffering – the disparity between   given reality and ideal requirements – is not to be found there,   or at least it does not reach consciousness. The most permanently   bitter tragedy, that which from within shatters a being to   fragments, has not yet been created; the figures we see are   entire and simple and move in
one
piece. Whether the   figures be large or small, whether their features be fair or   foul, they assume a kind of plastic beauty and   monumentality.
It is this that the Polish writer has attained in
Chlopi
;   and that he achieved it, in spite of a quite modern training   which scarcely promised to lead to such a goal, is surely due to   the fact that his chosen subject moved of itself toward this   happy form. He probably did not seek the form himself – that is   evidenced by the rest of his very different production; but when   it offered itself to him in the course of his work, he understood   it and followed its laws. This is surely merit enough and worthy   of great honour.
His Polish peasants possess in their primitive conditions, and   perhaps only in consequence thereof, the simple nature, the   archaism in their contours, demanded by epic art – a great   aesthetic value, which, however, has been obtained at the expense   of being defective in other ways. This throng of figures has   extremely little of what ordinarily is called character. Among   the men only few have even the raw material of character in   mental energy and firmness; and their working up of this material   inspires but little respect. The manliness which consists in   self-discipline, a sense of responsibility, and a personal grasp   of the idea of right, has barely attained any development beyond   collective and vague mass feeling. What we see of the life of   conscience is the common ground of the village, not the guarded   estate of the individual. Consequently one must not expect more   from the women: hence it is much that in one figure, the sorely   tried Hanus, the pliant forces of her nature become welded   together into a stubborn sense of duty.
There is really hardly any moral backbone to be found in this   low-lying tract round the sluggishly flowing river. Passion   bounces in men’s wills like a storm in the reeds, and they bend   before every breath of wind, and a spark sets everything ablaze.   The sense of honesty is uncertain, perhaps chiefly because it has   not had free air to grow in. From time immemorial this people has   had to protect itself against oppression by those who owned the   soil – all they had to subsist on. And when the soil at last   became theirs, the gift came from foreign masters, who grudged   them a soul of their own. The passivity, fatalism, and naive good   humour, which under similar circumstances were developed in their   Slavonic brethren to the east, held no power in the Polish   temperament. Here we meet instead a peculiar nervousness which is   not elsewhere a characteristic of the peasant, and which readily   expresses itself in anger and violent deeds. All their   ill-treatment has not sufficed to crush their pride, but that   pride is abundantly mixed with vanity; it is touchy, lacking in   balance, and gives no trustworthy support to human dignity. Their   virtues have as little root as those of children. They consist in   directness, in easily stirred susceptibility, in inflexible and   lively spirits: they point to a superfluity of unexhausted gifts;   and over the whole there extends a never-failing charm, a certain   glamour of nobility. But above all, these people appeal to us   through their strong imaginative life. In their poverty and   frailty they have windows opened to the world of dreams; and all   that is tender and good and beautiful in them flourishes   there.
The Church has preserved for them this city of refuge, and to her   they are attached with a deep love, piety, and reverence; through   her, they expect some day atonement and transfiguration; and in a   poetical sense they are already partaking of these good things.   By constantly returning to this feature Reymont has contrived to   keep the air of beauty over his epic.
Without effort, he has found the gleam of heroism which an epic   needs, although his subject matter did not provide him with   heroic figures. Heroism was to be found only in their primitively   strong, deep attachment to the soil, which gives and takes their   lives and lends to their struggle and their love something of the   greatness of the forces of nature. Epic breadth and greatness   have been attained, too, through the simple touch of genius in   the composition of the work, which has been cast in the form of a   cycle of the seasons. Autumn, winter, spring, and summer, in   symphonically balanced parts, give their contrasts and their   harmony in a mighty hymn to life; and when the year has swung   full circle in the vicissitudes of human fate, it continues in   our imagination in constant novelty and constant recurrence. he   episodes in the richly developed action do not occur once only:   they have a typical validity. Whether they are idyllic or   passionate, tragically wild or merrily diverting, they have all   been turned to a rhythm of «Works and Days» in a kind   of Hesiodic peasant-world: they have in them a dash of the   eternal youth of the earth.
The monotony tending to threaten the peasant novel through its   diffuseness of detail, has here generally been avoided by the   range and the mobility of the material. Unity of style has been   combined with an uncommon power and delight in colour in the   painting of the several parts; and the characterization of the   figures, in their dramatic working, has received due attention   within the given frame. Everything gives the impression of a   reality faithfully described – possibly with one exception, the   chief female character Jagna, who is quite as much a symbol as a   type. But the symbol is poetically justified. In fact, it is the   poetry of the Polish soil and the Polish peasant woman, all the   natural magic, the blind working of natural impulses, the pliancy   and imaginativeness, the hunger for beauty, and the absence of   responsibility, which flourish and intoxicate and are smirched   and trampled in times of trouble and guilt. She is the embodiment   of all the flaws that Reymont has revealed in his people, despite   his love for them; yet she also represents all those qualities   which are rich and splendid in human nature. He has made her the   tragic heroine of his work; and if, there as elsewhere (and   perhaps in consequence of a weakness he shares with the circles   he describes), he has passed no clear judgment, he has not   allowed any lessening of the tragic tension.
To sum up, this epic novel is characterized by an art so grand,   so sure, so powerful, that we may predict a lasting value and   rank for it, not only within Polish literature but also within   the whole of that branch of imaginative writing which has here   been given a distinctive and monumental shape.
*
Since no   official ceremony took place, the critical essay was prepared by   Per Hallström in lieu of a presentation speech.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
