Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1925 - Award ceremony speech
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1925
Nobel Prize in Literature 1925
George Bernard Shaw
- George Bernard Shaw
Swedish Academy
, on December 10, 1926
*
George Bernard Shaw showed in the novels of   his youth the same conception of the world and the same attitude   to social problems that he has maintained ever since. This   provides a better defence for him than anything else against the   repeated accusations of lack of honesty and of acting as a   professional buffoon at the court of democracy. From the very   beginning his convictions have been so firm that it seems as if   the general process of development, without having any   substantial influence on himself, has carried him along to the   tribune from which he now speaks. His ideas were those of a   somewhat abstract logical radicalism; hence they were far from   new, but they received from him a new definiteness and   brilliance. In him these ideas combined with a ready wit, a   complete absence of respect for any kind of convention, and the   merriest humour – all gathered together in an extravagance which   has scarcely ever before appeared in literature.
What puzzled people most was his rollicking gaiety: they were   ready to believe that the whole thing was a game and a desire to   startle. This was so far from being true that Shaw himself has   been able to declare with a greater justice that his careless   attitude was a mere stratagem: he had to fool people into   laughing so they should not hit upon the idea of hanging him. But   we know very well that he would hardly have been frightened out   of his outspokenness by anything that might have happened, and   that he chose his weapons just as much because they suited him as   because they were the most effective. He wielded them with the   certitude of genius, which rested on an absolutely quiet   conscience and on a faithful conviction.
Early he became a prophet of revolutionary doctrines, quite   varied in their value, in the spheres of aesthetics and   sociology, and he soon won for himself a notable position as a   debater, a popular speaker, and a journalist. He set his mark on   the English theatre as a champion of Ibsen and as an opponent of   superficial tradition, both English and Parisian. His own   dramatic production began quite late, at the age of thirty-six,   in order to help satisfy the demands that he had aroused. He   wrote his plays with instinctive sureness, based on the certainty   that he had a great deal to say.
In this casual manner he came to create what is to some extent a   new kind of dramatic art, which must be judged according to its   own special principles. Its novelty does not lie so much in   structure and form; from his wide-awake and trained knowledge of   the theatre, he promptly and quite simply obtains any scenic   effect he feels necessary for his ends. But the directness with   which he puts his ideas into practice is entirely his own; and so   too are the bellicosity, the mobility, and the multiplicity of   his ideas.
In France he has been called the Molière of the twentieth   century; and there is some truth in the parallel, for Shaw   himself believes that he was following classical tendencies in   dramatic art. By classicism he means the rigorously rational and   dialectical bent of mind and the opposition to everything that   could be called romanticism.
He began with what he calls
Plays Unpleasant
(1898), so   named because they brought the spectator face to face with   unpleasant facts and cheated him of the thoughtless entertainment   or sentimental edification that he expected from the stage. These   plays dwell on serious abuses – the exploitation and prostitution   of poor people, while those who perpetrate these abuses manage to   retain their respectability.
It is characteristic of Shaw that his orthodox socialistic   severity toward the community is combined with a great freedom   from prejudice and a genuine psychological insight when he deals   with the individual sinner. Even in these early pieces one of his   finest qualities, his humanity, is fully and clearly   marked.
Plays Pleasant
(1898), with which he varied his program,   have on the whole the same purport but are lighter in tone. With   one of these he gained his first great success. This was
Arms   and the Man
, an attempt to demonstrate the flimsiness of   military and heroic romance, in contrast to the sober and prosaic   work of peace. Its pacifist tendency won from the audience a more   ready approbation than the author had generally received. In
Candida
, a kind of
Doll’s House
with a happy   ending, he created the work which for a long time was his most   poetical one. This was due chiefly to the fact that in this play   the strong superior woman which for him – for reasons unknown to   us – has become the normal type, has here been given a richer,   warmer, and more gentle soul than elsewhere.
In
Man and Superman
(1903) he took his revenge by   proclaiming that woman, because of her resolute and undisguisedly   practical nature, is destined to be the superman whose coming has   been so long prophesied with such earnest yearning. The jest is   amusing, but its creator seems to regard it more or less   seriously, even if one takes into account his spirit of   opposition to the earlier English worship of the gentle female   saint.
His next great drama of ideas,
Major Barbara
(1905), has a   deeper significance. It discusses the problem of whether evil   ought to be conquered by the inner way, the spirit of joyful and   religious sacrifice; or by the outer way, the eradication of   poverty, the real foundation of all social defects. Shaw’s   heroine, one of his most remarkable female characters, ends in a   compromise between the power of money and that of the Salvation   Army. The process of thought is here carried out with great   force, and naturally with a great deal of paradox. The drama is   not entirely consistent, but it reveals a surprisingly fresh and   clear conception of the joy and poetry of the life of practical   faith. Shaw the rationalist here shows himself more liberal and   more chivalrous than is customary with the type.
Time does not permit us to hint at the course of his further   campaign even in his more outstanding works: suffice it to say   that without a trace of opportunism he turns his weapons against   everything that he conceives as prejudice in whatever camp it may   be found. His boldest assault would seem to be in
Heartbreak   House
(1919), where he sought to embody – always in the light   of the comic spirit – every kind of perversity, artificiality,   and morbidity that flourishes in a state of advanced   civilization, playing with vital values, the hardening of the   conscience, and the ossification of the heart, under a frivolous   preoccupation with art and science, politics, money-hunting, and   erotic philandering. But, whether owing to the excessive wealth   of the material or to the difficulty of treating it gaily, the   piece has sunk into a mere museum of eccentricities with the   ghost-like appearance of a shadowy symbolism.
In
Back to Methuselah
(1921) he achieved an introductory   essay that was even more brilliant than usual, but his dramatic   presentation of the thesis, that man must have his natural age   doubled many times over in order to acquire enough sense to   manage his world, furnished but little hope and little joy. It   looked as if the writer of the play had hypertrophied his wealth   of ideas to the great injury of his power of organic   creation.
But then came
Saint Joan
(1923), which showed this man of   surprises at the height of his power as a poet. This it did   especially on the stage, where all that was most valuable and   central in the play was thrown into due relief and revealed its   real weight, even against the parts that might evoke opposition.   Shaw had not been happy in his previous essays in historical   drama; and this was natural enough, as he happened to combine   with his abundant and quick intelligence a decided lack of   historical imagination and sense of historical reality. His world   lacked one dimension, that of time, which according to the newest   theories is not without significance for space. This led to an   unfortunate lack of respect for all that had once been and to a   tendency to represent everything as diametrically opposite to   what ordinary mortals had previously believed or said.
In
Saint Joan
his good head still cherishes the same   opinion on the whole, but his good heart has found in his heroine   a fixed point in the realm of the unsubstantial, from which it   has been able to give flesh and blood to the visions of the   imagination. With doubtful correctness he has simplified her   image, but he has also made uncommonly fresh and living the lines   that remain, and he has endowed
Saint Joan
with the power   of directly holding the multitude. This imaginative work stands   more or less alone as a revelation of heroism in an age hardly   favourable to genuine heroism. The mere fact that it did not fail   makes it highly remarkable; and the fact that it was able to make   a triumphal progress all around the world is in this case   evidence of considerable artistic worth.
If from this point we look back on Shaw’s best works, we find it   easier in many places, beneath all his sportiveness and defiance,   to discern something of the same idealism that has found   expression in the heroic figure of Saint Joan. His criticism of   society and his perspective of its course of development may have   appeared too nakedly logical, too hastily thought out, too   unorganically simplified; but his struggle against traditional   conceptions that rest on no solid basis and against traditional   feelings that are either spurious or only half genuine, have   borne witness to the loftiness of his aims. Still more striking   is his humanity; and the virtues to which he has paid homage in   his unemotional way – spiritual freedom, honesty, courage, and   clearness of thought – have had so very few stout champions in   our times.
What I have said has given a mere glimpse of Shaw’s life-work,   and scarcely anything has been said about his famous prefaces –   or rather treatises – accompanying most of the plays. Great parts   of them are insurpassable in their clarity, their quickness, and   their brilliance. The plays themselves have given him the   position of one of the most fascinating dramatic authors of our   day, while his prefaces have given him the rank of the Voltaire   of our time – if we think only of the best of Voltaire. From the   point of view of a pure and simple style they would seem to   provide a supreme, and in its way classic, expression of the   thought and polemics of an age highly journalistic in tone, and,   even more important, they strengthen Shaw’s distinguished   position in English literature.
At the banquet, Mr. Shaw’s thanks were   presented by the British Ambassador, Sir Arthur Grant Duff, who   expressed particular appreciation of the fact that the Prize   given to Mr. Shaw would be used to strengthen the cultural   relations between Sweden and Great Britain.
* The Nobel Prize   in Literature 1925 was announced on November 11, 1926
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
