Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1928
Nobel Prize in Literature 1928
Sigrid Undset
- Sigrid Undset
Swedish Academy
, on December 10, 1928
In her first novels or novellas, all of   them remarkable works, Sigrid Undset painted the present-day   world of young women in the environs of Christiania. It was a   restless generation, prompt to make the gravest decisions as soon   as its aspirations for happiness were at stake, ready to take the   ultimate logical and sentimental consequences of its impulsive   nature, and impassioned for truth. This generation had to pay   dearly for the sense of reality it acquired. It had to pass   through many trials before regaining its inner unity, and some of   its representatives succumbed in the struggle. The women of this   generation were strangely isolated in this disconcerting world.   Far from finding support in a firmly established social rule,   they had, in full consciousness, renounced the heritage of the   past. Hostile to all established social order, which they   considered a useless yoke, they counted only on themselves to   create a new society, consistent with a conviction, doubtless   sincere at bottom, but easily misled.
With a lively imagination, Sigrid Undset lived the life of these   women; she portrayed them sympathetically but with merciless   truthfulness. She traced the tragedy of their lives without   embellishing or amplifying it; and she conveyed the evolution of   their destinies with the most implacable logic, which implied the   condemnation of her heroines and of the world in which they were   living. The picture is gripping, as far as the scope of the   personages permits; it is attractive only in its marvellously   fresh and brilliant descriptions of nature. Remaining forever in   the reader’s memory are the excursions on skis in the Norwegian   solitude, the effects of the capricious play of the winter light,   the exhilaration of the icy wind during the run, the mad dance of   the blood in the veins, the spirit of adventure, the joy, the   feeling of life and strength which makes the heart pound. And   Sigrid Undset describes with the same mastery the splendours of   spring, saturated with light and full of promises. In this domain   her art attained greatness quite early.
This greatness began to extend to her entire work as soon as she   abandoned the disunified and uprooted beings of the present time   who had attracted her attention, in order to dedicate herself to   the life of a distant past. She was destined by birth to do   pioneer work in this area. Her father was a gifted historian, and   from childhood she had lived in an atmosphere of historic legend   and folklore. Moreover, she acquired a solid historical   knowledge, guided, it would seem, by this premonition of the task   her genius had set for her.
There she found the material which truly suited her nature, and   her imagination was confronted with a task adequate to its scope.   The characters she was going to make appear out of the past would   offer a more complete unity and would be of a firmer cast than   the contemporary characters. Far from being confined in a sterile   isolation, they would participate in the great solidarity of past   generations. These great masses would come alive in her work in a   more vivid, firmer shape than the amorphous society of our era.   Here was a great challenge to a writer who felt capable of   carrying a heavy burden.
In their fashion, the generations of the Middle Ages also enjoyed   a more varied inner life than the present generation, which   Sigrid Undset found obsessed with the pursuit of sexual   happiness, a quest which also determined their concepts of truth.   These ancestors were strongly determined by the sentiment of   honour and by faith. Here was the rich field for a psychology   adequate to them. Moreover, the author’s imagination was bound to   be attracted by the difficult task of conjuring out of the   darkness of a little known past the external life of former   generations in all its diversity. Sigrid Undset has done so to an   extent that has aroused general admiration.
In so far as the inner life is concerned, her work can hardly be   criticized. Intimately combined with the consciousness of the   nation, in her depiction, honour retains all the rigour and all   the weight that it had for the chevaliers and great landowners of   the fourteenth century. The demands of honour are clearly stated,   and the conflicts it creates are worked out regardless of their   brutal consequences. Religious life is described with startling   truth. Under Sigrid Undset’s pen it does not become a continuous   holiday of the mind, penetrating and dominating human nature; it   remains, as in our day, insecure and rebellious, and is often   even harsher. Profoundly conscious of the hold of faith on these   inexperienced and unpolished souls, the author has given it, in   the grave hours of existence, an overwhelming power.
The erotic life, the problem common to the two sexes, which   constitutes the centre of Sigrid Undset’s psychological interest,   is found again, almost without modifications, in her historical   novels. In this respect, objections naturally come to mind. In   medieval documents, the feminist question is not known; one never   finds hints of the inner personal life which later was to raise   this question. The historian, demanding proofs, has the right to   note this discrepancy. But the historian’s claim is not absolute;   the poet has at least an equal right to express himself when he   relies on a solid and intuitive knowledge of the human soul. The   archaeologist must admit that there existed in the past   instruments of a nature other than those which have come down to   us, not to mention the often fortuitous ways in which the   memories of the past have reached us. The poet has the right to   suppose that human nature has hardly varied in the course of   ages, even if the annals of the past are silent in certain   regards.
In spite of the laws imposed by necessity, the common life of man   and woman could scarcely have been peaceful and simple. It was no   doubt less noisy than in our day, but it was exempt from neither   conflicts nor bloody disturbances. To these conflicts and   disturbances Sigrid Undset gave a voice, although it sometimes   seems that the voice had accents far too modern and that the   sentiments were too subtle for an era in which the influence of   poetry had not yet manifested itself. The heavier and harsher   environment seems also to have been of a nature which hardened   the characters more firmly. But it is to this dissemblance, if   indeed one can speak of dissemblance, that her poetic work owes   its poignant and evocative life. In the inevitable compromise   between the present and the past, from which the historical novel   cannot escape, Sigrid Undset has chosen a richly rewarding   way.
Her narrative is vigorous, sweeping, and at times heavy. It rolls   on like a river, ceaselessly receiving new tributaries whose   course the author also describes, at the risk of overtaxing the   reader’s memory. This stems in part from the very nature of the   subject. In the series of generations, conflicts and destinies   assume a very concentrated form; these are whole masses of clouds   which collide when the lightning flashes. However, this heaviness   is also a result of the author’s ardent and instant imagination,   forming a scene and a dialogue of each incident in the narrative   without taking the necessary backward look at the general   perspective. And the vast river, whose course is difficult to   embrace comprehensively, rolls its powerful waves which carry   along the reader, plunged into a sort of torpor. But the roaring   of its waters has the eternal freshness of nature. In the rapids   and in the falls, the reader finds the enchantment which emanates   from the power of the elements, as in the vast mirror of the   lakes he notices a reflection of immensity, with the vision there   of all possible greatness in human nature. Then, when the river   reaches the sea, when Kristin Lavransdatter has fought to the end   the battle of her life, no one complains of the length of the   course which accumulated so overwhelming a depth and profundity   in her destiny. In the poetry of all times, there are few scenes   of comparable excellence.
Sigrid Undset’s last novel, the two-volume story of
Olav   Audunssøn
(1925-27), is generally on a level with the   preceding novel, although it does not soar to its tragic finale.   It attains, however, almost the same height in the scene in which   Olav kills the Icelander. This scene constitutes a magnificent   tableau, a masterly expression of the inner life, with a   loftiness, a justice, an almost superhuman breadth of view rising   above all the atrocities. One rediscovers here the same ripening   of power as in
Kristin Lavransdatter
(1920-22). As far as   the character studies are concerned, it seems impossible to reach   higher than the portrayal of Eirik, the principal personage of   the last part of the novel. Here is the complete evolution of a   human being, from the first manifestations of childhood which are   recorded not only with a vigorous strictness but also with a   surprising superimposition of new traits, proportionate to the   increasing clarity in the character delineation. One sees a human   soul freely develop under one’s eyes, a true creation of a truly   superior art.
Sigrid Undset has received the Nobel Prize in Literature while   still in her prime, an homage rendered to a poetic genius whose   roots must be in a great and well-ordered spirit.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
