Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1929
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 1929
Nobel Prize in Literature 1929
Thomas Mann
- Thomas Mann
If one asks which innovation the nineteenth   century made in the field of literature, which new form it   created in addition to the old forms of epic, drama, and lyric,   whose roofs are in Greece, the answer must be: the realistic   novel. By setting forth the innermost, secret experiences of the   human soul against the background of contemporary social   conditions, and by stressing the interdependence of the general   and the particular, it has been able to portray reality with a   faithful accuracy and a completeness that have no parallels in   older literature.
The realistic novel – one could call it a modern prose epic   influenced by historicism and science – has by and large been the   creation of the English, the French, and the Russians; it is   associated with the names of Dickens and Thackeray, Balzac and   Flaubert, Gogol and Tolstoy. There was no comparable contribution   from Germany for a long time; poetic creativity there chose other   outlets. The nineteenth century had come to its end when a young   writer, the twenty-seven-year-old son of a merchant from the old   Hanse city of Lübeck, published his novel
Buddenbrooks
(1901). Twenty-seven years have passed since   then, and it has become clear to all that
Buddenbrooks
is   the masterpiece that fills the gap. Here is the first and as yet   unsurpassed German realistic novel in the grand style which takes   its undisputed and equal place in the European concert.
Buddenbrooks
is a bourgeois novel, for the century it   portrays was above all a bourgeois era. It depicts a society   neither so great as to bewilder the observer, nor so small and   narrow as to stifle him. This middle level favours an   intelligent, thoughtful, and subtle analysis, and the creative   power itself, the pleasure of epic narration, is shaped by calm,   mature, and sophisticated reflection. We see a bourgeois   civilization in all its nuances, we see the historical horizons,   the changes of time, the changes of generations, the gradual   transition from self-contained, powerful, and un-self-conscious   characters to reflective types of a refined and weak sensibility.   The presentation is lucid yet penetrates beneath the surface to   hidden processes of life; it is powerful but never brutal, and   touches lightly on delicate things; it is sad and serious but   never depressing because it is permeated by a quiet, deep sense   of humour that is iridescently reflected in the prism of ironic   intelligence.
As a portrayal of a society, a concrete and objective   representation of reality,
Buddenbrooks
hardly has its   equal in German literature. Beyond the limits of its genre,   however, the novel betrays its common features with the German   mind, with metaphysical and musical transcendentalism. The young   writer who had mastered the techniques of literary realism so   perfectly was at heart a convert to Schopenhauer’s pessimism and   Nietzsche’s criticism of civilization, and the main characters of   the novel reveal their ultimate secrets in music.
Basically
Buddenbrooks
is a philosophical novel. The   decline of a family is portrayed from the point of view that a   profound insight into the essence and conditions of life is   irreconcilable with naive
joie de vivre
and active energy.   Reflection, self-observation, psychological refinement,   philosophical profundity, and aesthetic sensibility appear to the   young Thomas Mann destructive and disintegrating forces; in one   of his most exquisite stories,
Tonio Kröger
(1903),   he has found moving words for his love of human life in all its   simplicity. Because he stood outside the bourgeois world that he   portrayed, his vision was free, but he had a nostalgic feeling   for the loss of naiveté, a feeling which gives him   understanding, sympathy, and respect.
The painful experience of Mann’s youth that gave its profound   tone to
Buddenbrooks
includes a problem that he has   treated and tried to solve in different ways throughout his   career as a writer. Within himself he has felt the tension   between the aesthetic-philosophical and the pragmatic-bourgeois   outlooks, and he has tried to resolve it in harmony on a higher   level. In the short stories
Tonio Kröger
and
Tristan
(1903) the exiles from life, the devotees of art,   knowledge, and death, confess their desire for a simple and   healthy existence, for «life in its seductive   banality». It is Mann’s own paradoxical love for simple and   happy natures that speaks through them.
In the novel
Königliche Hoheit
(1909) [
Royal   Highness
], whose realistic form disguises a symbolic story,   he reconciled the life of the artist with that of the man of   action, and he gave a motto to that human ideal: «highness   and love – an austere happiness». But the synthesis is   neither as convincing nor as deeply felt as the antithesis in
Buddenbrooks
and the short stories. In the drama
Fiorenza
(1906), in which the moralist Savonarola and the   aestheticist Lorenzo di Medici appear as irreconcilable enemies,   the gap is opened anew. In
Der Tod in Venedig
(1913)   [
Death in Venice
] it reaches tragic significance. It was   during this period, in the years that preceded the World   War, that he became interested in the personality of Frederick   the Great. He felt that that ruler presented a historically valid   solution of the problem, for Frederick’s genius had, with   unbroken vitality, combined action, contemplation, and a   penetrating clarity free from illusions. In the ingenious essay
Friedrich und die grosse Koalition
(1915) [
Frederick   the Great and the Grand Coalition
] he showed the possibility   and reality of the solution, but the problematic writer of
Buddenbrooks
did not succeed in representing this ideal in   the plastic and vital form of literature.
The World War and its consequences forced Mann to leave the   world of contemplation, of ingenious analysis and subtle visions   of beauty, for the world of practical action. He followed his own   advice, implied in his novel
Königliche Hoheit
, to   beware of the easy and the comfortable, and dedicated himself to   an agonizing reappraisal of the questions that his country faced   in its time of affliction. His later works, especially the novel
Der Zauberberg
(1924) [
The Magic Mountain
], testify   to the struggle of the ideas which his dialectical nature fought   to the end and which preceded the statement of his   opinions.
Dr. Thomas Mann – As a German writer and thinker you have,   reflecting realities, wrestled with ideas and created painful   beauty even though you were convinced that art is questionable.   You have reconciled the loftiness of poetry and the intellect   with a yearning love for the human and for the simple life.   Accept from the hands of our King the Prize that the Swedish   Academy with its congratulations has awarded to you.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
