Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1930
Nobel Prize in Literature 1930
Sinclair Lewis
- Sinclair Lewis
Erik Axel Karlfeldt
,   Permanent Secretary of the
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1930
This year’s winner of the Nobel Prize in   Literature is a native of a part of America which for a long time   has had Swedish contacts. He was born at Sauk Centre, a place of   about two or three thousand inhabitants in the great cornland of   Minnesota. He describes the place in his novel
Main Street
(1920), though there it is called Gopher Prairie.
It is the great prairie, an undulating land with lakes and oak   groves, which has produced that little town and many others   exactly like it. The pioneers have need of places to sell their   grain, shops to purchase their supplies, banks for their mortgage   loans, doctors for their bodies, and clergymen for their souls.   There is cooperation between the country and the town, but at the   same time there is conflict. Does the town exist for the sake of   the country, or the country for the town?
The prairie makes its power felt. During the winters, long and   cold as ours, terrific storms dump their snow in the wide   streets, between low and shabby houses. The summer scorches with   an intense heat and the town smells, because it lacks both sewers   and street cleaning. Yet the town naturally feels its   superiority; it is the flower of the prairie. It has the economic   threads in its hands, and it is the focus of civilization – a   concentrated, proud America amidst these earth-bound thralls of   foreign origin, Germans and Scandinavians.
Thus the town lives happily in its self-confidence and its belief   in true democracy, which does not exclude a proper stratification   of the people, its faith in a sound business morality, and the   blessings of being motorized; for there are many Fords in Main   Street.
To this town comes a young woman filled with rebellious emotions.   She wants to reform the town, inside and out, but fails   completely, almost going under in the attempt.
As a description of life in a small town,
Main Street
is   certainly one of the best ever written. To be sure, the town is   first and foremost American, but it could, as a spiritual milieu,   be situated just as well in Europe. Like Mr. Lewis, many of us   have suffered from its ugliness and bigotry. The strong satire   has aroused local protests, but one need not be keensighted to   see the tolerant strain in Lewis’s sketch of his native town and   its people.
Behind the puffed-up complacency of Gopher Prairie, however,   lurks jealousy. At the edge of the plain stand cities like St.   Paul and Minneapolis, already little metropolitan centres with   their skyscraper windows gleaming in the sunlight or the   evening’s electricity. Gopher Prairie wants to be like them and   finds the time ripe for a campaign of progress, based on the   rising war price of wheat.
A stump orator is imported, a real rabble-rouser of the peppiest   kind, and with blatant eloquence he demonstrates that nothing   will be easier than for Gopher Prairie to take the lead and reach   the 200,000 class.
Mr. Babbitt – George Follansbee Babbitt – is the happy citizen of   such a city (
Babbitt
, 1922). It is called Zenith, but   probably it cannot be found on the map under that name. This city   with its enlarged horizons hereafter becomes the starting point   for Mr. Lewis’s critical raids into the territories of   Americanism. The city is a hundred times larger than Gopher   Prairie and, therefore, a hundred times richer in one hundred per   cent Americanism and one hundred times as satisfied with itself,   and the enchantment of its optimism and progressive spirit is   embodied in George F. Babbitt.
As a matter of fact, Babbitt probably approaches the ideal of an   American popular hero of the middle class. The relativity of   business morals as well as private rules of conduct is for him an   accepted article of faith, and without hesitation he considers it   God’s purpose that man should work, increase his income, and enjoy   modern improvements. He feels that he obeys these commandments   and therefore lives in complete harmony with himself and   society.
His profession, real estate, is the highest in existence, and his   house near the city, with its trees and lawn, is standard, inside   and out. The make of his car corresponds to his position, and in   it he whizzes through the streets, proud as a young hero amidst   the perils of the traffic. His family life also corresponds to   the bourgeois average. His wife has become used to his masculine   rumblings at home, and the children are impertinent, but that is   what one expects.
He enjoys excellent health, is well-fed and thriving, alert and   good-natured. His daily lunches at the club are feasts of   instructive business conversation and stimulating anecdotes; he   is sociable and winning. Babbitt is furthermore a man with the gift   of speech. He has learned all the national slogans and whirls   them about with his flowing tongue in his popular talks before   clubs and mass meetings. Not even for the most elevated   spirituality does he lack sympathy. He basks in the company of   the noted poet, Cholmondeley Frink, who concentrates his genius   on the composition of striking, rhymed advertisements for various   firms and thereby earns a good annual income.
Thus Babbitt lives the life of the irreproachable citizen   conscious of his respectability. But the jealousy of the gods   broods over a mortal whose happiness grows too great. A soul such   as Babbitt’s is, of course, incapable of growth; it is a   ready-made article from the start. Then Babbitt discovers that he   has tendencies toward vice which he has neglected – although not   wholly, one ought to add. As he approaches fifty, he hastens to   make up for the neglect. He enters into an irregular relationship   and joins a frivolous gang of youths, in which he plays the role   of a generous sugar daddy. But his deeds find him out. His   lunches at the club become more and more painful through the   silence and aloofness of his friends. They hint that he is   spoiling this chance of future membership in the committee of   progress. Here it is naturally New York and Chicago that loom   before him. He succeeds in recovering his better self, and it is   edifying to see him kneel in his pastor’s study, where he   receives absolution. And then Babbitt can once more devote   himself to the Sunday school and other socially useful   activities. His story ends as it began.
That it is institutions as representatives of false ideas, and   not individuals, that Mr. Lewis wants to attack with his satire,   he has himself indicated. It is then a triumph for his art, a   triumph almost unique in literature, that he has been able to   make this Babbitt, who fatalistically lives within the borders of   an earth-bound but at the same time pompous utilitarianism, an   almost lovable individual.
Babbitt is naive, and a believer who speaks up for his faith. At   bottom there is nothing wrong with the man, and he is so   festively refreshing that he almost serves as a recommendation   for American snap and vitality. There are bouncers and   Philistines in all countries, and one can only wish that half of   them were half as amusing as Babbitt.
To the splendour of the figure, as well as to other speaking   characters in the book, Mr. Lewis has added his unparalleled gift   of words. Listen, for example, to the conversation of a few   commercial travellers, sitting together in a compartment of the   New York express. An unsuspected halo falls over the profession   of selling. «To them, the Romantic Hero was no longer the   knight, the wandering poet, the cowpuncher, the aviator, nor the   brave young district attorney, but the great sales manager, who   had an Analysis of Merchandizing Problems on his glass-topped   desk, whose title of nobility was ‹Go-getter› and who   devoted himself and all his young samurai to the cosmic purpose   of Selling – not of selling anything in particular, for or to   anybody in particular, but pure Selling.»
Arrowsmith
(1925) is a work of a more serious     nature. Lewis has there attempted to represent the medical profession and     science in all its manifestations. As is well known, American research in     the natural sciences, physics, chemistry, and medicine ranks with the     best of our age, and it has several times been recognized as such     from this very platform. Tremendous resources have been placed at     its command. Richly endowed institutions work unceasingly on its     development.
That even here some speculative persons want to take advantage of     their opportunities may be regarded as inevitable. Private     industries are on the alert for scientific discoveries and want     to profit from them before they have been tested and finally     established. The bacteriologist, for instance, searches with     infinite care for vaccines to cure widespread diseases, and the     manufacturing chemist wants to snatch them prematurely from his     hand for mass production.
Under the guidance of a gifted and conscientious teacher, Martin     Arrowsmith develops into one of the idealists of science. The     tragedy of his life as research worker is that, after making an     important discovery, he delays its announcement for constantly     renewed tests until he is anticipated by a Frenchman in the     Pasteur Institute.
The book contains a rich gallery of different medical types. We     have the hum of the medical schools with their quarrelling and     intriguing professors. Then there is the unpretentious country     doctor, recalled from
Main Street
, who regards it as an     honour to merge with his clientele and become their support and     solace. Then we have the shrewd organizer of public health and     general welfare, who works himself into popular favour and     political power. Next we have the large institutes with their     apparently royally independent investigators, under a management     which to a certain extent must take into consideration the     commercial interests of the donors and drive the staff to forced     work for the honour of the institutes.
Above these types rises Arrowsmith’s teacher, the exiled German     Jew, Gottlieb, who is drawn with a warmth and admiration that     seem to suggest a living model. He is an incorruptibly honest     servant of science, but at the same time a resentful anarchist     and a stand-offish misanthrope, who doubts whether the humanity     whose benefactor he is amounts to as much as the animals he kills     with his experiments. Further we meet the Swedish doctor, Gustaf     Sondelius, a radiant Titan, who with singing and courage pursues     pests in their lairs throughout the world, exterminates poisonous     rats and burns infected villages, drinks and preaches his gospel     that hygiene is destined to kill the medical art.
Alongside all of this runs the personal history of Martin     Arrowsmith. Lewis is much too clever to make his characters     without blemish, and Martin suffers from faults which at times     seem obstructive to his development, both as a man and as a     scientist. As a restless and irresolute young man he gets his     best help from a little woman he encountered at a hospital where     she was an insignificant nurse. When he begins to drift about the     country as an unsuccessful medical student, he looks her up in a     little village in the Far West, and there she becomes his wife.     She is a devoted and simple soul, who demands nothing and who     patiently waits in her solitude when, bewitched by the siren of     science, her husband loses himself in the labyrinths of his     work.
Later she accompanies him and Sondelius to the plague-infected     island where Arrowsmith wants to test his serum. Her death in the     abandoned hut, while her husband listens distractedly to another     and more earthy siren than that of science, seems like a     poetically crowning final act to a life of primitive     self-sacrificing femininity.
The book is full of admirable learning, certified by experts as     being accurate. Though a master of light-winged words, Lewis is     never superficial when it comes to the foundations of his art.     His study of details is always as careful and thorough as that of     such a scientist as Arrowsmith or Gottlieb. In this work he has     built a monument to the profession of his own father, that of the     physician, which certainly is not represented by a charlatan or a     faker.
His big novel
Elmer Gantry
(1927) is like a surgical     operation on one of the most delicate parts of the social body.     Presumably it would not pay to search anywhere in the world for     the old Puritanical virtues, but possibly one might find in some     of the oldest corners of America a remnant of the sect which     regarded it as a sin to remarry, once it had pleased God to make     one a widower or widow, and wicked to lend money at interest. But     otherwise America has no doubt had to moderate its religious     rigidity. To what extent a pulpiteer like Elmer Gantry is common     over there, we cannot here have the slightest idea. Neither his     slapdash style of preaching with his cocky pugilistic manners     («Hello, Mr. Devil») nor his successful collecting of     money and men inside the gates of the church can hide the sad     fact that he is an unusually foul fish. Mr. Lewis has been     neither willing nor able to give him any attractive traits. But     as description the book is a feat of strength, genuine and     powerful, and its full-flavoured, sombre satire has a devastating     effect. It is unnecessary to point out that hypocrisy thrives a     little everywhere and that any one who attacks it at such a close     range places himself before a hydra with many dangerous     heads.
Sinclair Lewis’s latest work is called
Dodsworth
(1929).     In his books we have previously caught glimpses of the family as     one of the most aristocratic in Zenith – a circle where no     Babbitt ever gains admission. «Most aristocratic»     probably often means in America «richest», but Sam     Dodsworth is both aristocratic and rich. Even after 300 years he     notices the English blood in his veins and wants to know the land     of his ancestors. He is an American, but not a jingo. With him     travels his wife, Fran. She is already over forty, while he is     fifty. She is a cool beauty, «virginal as the winter     wind», though she has grown children. In the European     atmosphere she blossoms as a brilliant flower of luxury,     revelling in vanity, pleasure, and selfishness. She goes so far     that the quiet man who loves her has to leave her to her     fate.
Once alone he meditates on the problem «Europe-America», and as a real business man he wants     to clear up his accounts with both. He thinks of many things,     honestly and without prejudice. One of his observations is that     the very soil of Europe has some of the old-time quiet, which is     scorned by America, the land of restless record-hunters. But     America is the land of youth and daring experiments. And when he     returns there, we understand that the heart of Sinclair Lewis     follows him.
Yes, Sinclair Lewis is an American. He writes the new language –     American – as one of the representatives of 120,000,000 souls. He     asks us to consider that this nation is not yet finished or     melted down; that it is still in the turbulent years of     adolescence.
The new great American literature has started with national     self-criticism. It is a sign of health. Sinclair Lewis has the     blessed gift of wielding his landclearing implement not only with     a firm hand but with a smile on his lips and youth in his heart.     He has the manners of a new settler, who takes new land into     cultivation. He is a pioneer.
Mr. Sinclair Lewis – I have spoken of you to this assembly in a     language which you do not understand. I might have abused the     occasion to speak ill of you. I have not done it. I have spoken     of you as one of the strong, young chieftains of the great new     American literature. Besides, you have a special recommendation     to Swedish hearts. You were born among our countrymen in America,     and you have mentioned them in friendly terms in your renowned     books. We are glad to see you here today and glad that our nation     has a laurel of its own to bestow on you. And now I ask you to     descend with me and receive it from the hand of our King.
At the banquet, Tor Hedberg, Member of the   Swedish Academy, addressed the laureate: «Finally, Mr.   Lewis, in your person we greet that [American] new building on   its own American ground. It has been said that the Nobel Prize in   Literature has found its way across the Atlantic far too late. If   so, it has not been due to any indifference on the part of the   Swedish Academy, nor to any lack of knowledge, but rather to an   «embarras de richesse». It has further been said that   the award of a prize to your work, in which the follies of   mankind – not excluding those that are perhaps special to America   – have been scourged, is an expression of some kind of European   or Swedish animosity against America. I dare to assert that this   is a complete mistake. It is with living humour that you aim the   blows of your scourge, and where there is humour, there is a   heart too. It is not only the keen and lively intellect, the   masterly design of human shapes and characters but also the warm,   open, gaily-beating heart that we have appreciated in you».   Sinclair Lewis expressed his gratitude and declared that he felt   closely related to the Swedish people because of his many   acquaintances among the Swedish families of Minnesota. He said   that the Nobel Prize had a great significance for him, that it   had in fact created a new standard which implied an obligation to   improve on what he had done so far. Furthermore, he considered it   a high honour to have been awarded the Nobel Prize along with the   renowned scholars who received the distinction. He said that,   personally, he had the profoundest respect for the integrity of   the scientist, and thought that a man of letters, himself   included, should strive for the same integrity.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
