Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1931
Nobel Prize in Literature 1931
Erik Axel Karlfeldt
- Erik Axel Karlfeldt
Swedish Academy,
on December 10, 1931
If an interested foreigner were to ask one   of Erik Axel Karlfeldt’s countrymen what we admire most in this   poet and on what qualities his national greatness depends, it   would at first seem easy to give an answer. People like to talk   of what they love. The Swede would say that we celebrate this   poet because he represents our character with a style and a   genuineness that we should like to be ours, and because he has   sung with singular power and exquisite charm of the tradition of   our people, of all the precious features which are the basis for   our feeling for home and country in the shadow of the   pine-covered mountains.
But the Swede would soon check himself, realizing that such a   general explanation is insufficient, that in Karlfeldt there are   many things, beloved but difficult to define, which a proper   appraisal must take into account but which are inaccessible to   the foreigner. Hence we can offer no ready-made expression of our   conviction of the high rank of Karlfeldt’s poetry, for there are   elements of mysticism in it, powers and instincts that elude   analysis.
We face a similar difficulty on this occasion when we are to   briefly sketch the life-work of the great lyrical poet, since it   has now been made the object of a great international award. It   is the deliberate self-limitation of lyrical poetry, and at the   same time its fate, that its most profound qualities and values   are indissolubly connected with the character and rhythm of its   original language, with the meaning and weight of every single   word. Karlfeldt’s individuality may be dimly felt in a   translation, but only in Swedish can it be fully comprehended.   However, if one attempts to find independent comparative   criteria, he is forced to admit that even the treasures of the   so-called great literatures have only rarely been enriched by   such jewels as Karlfeldt has created in a so-called minor   language.
If we look back on Karlfeldt’s notable career from its début   in 1895 and follow it through the works of three decades, steady   though limited in size by his austere standards, we see very   clearly how this man used his talents with a rare instinct for   the fruitful, the solid, and the genuine. He began as a minstrel   and a singer of nature, conscious of his ability but still   doubtful of his calling. Was there any use for the dreams that   thronged his breast? Could they have a meaning for a whole   people? Early in his career, the poet looked for a deputy, an   alter ego, an independent figure suited to represent his   feelings, his sufferings, and his longing as well as his sarcasm.   The famous Fridolin was at first a creation of shyness, for the   poet was reluctant to appear in his own person and expose the   private life of his soul. Fridolin soon became a classic, and he   has his place in the rout of Northern Bacchus, rustic cousin of   the characters of Bellman, with a firmer gait, but with flowers   on his hat from the harvest festival at Pungmakarebo. Karlfeldt’s   home became more and more an artistic microcosm in which the   universe was mirrored in the same manner as Biblical scenes are   mirrored in the baroque fantasies of the frescoes in the   farmhouses of Dalekarlia. With his sense of humour, which was   often reverence in disguise, he kept his being unstained, and he   preserved the magic ring of harmony. But his seemingly peaceful   development must have contained many struggles and tensions, just   enough to create the necessary pressure for the creative spring.   Poetry was for Karlfeldt a continuous test of the strength and   substance of his being. Thus he gave a powerful finale to his   poetry in Hösthorn (1927) [The Horn of Autumn], his epilogue   played on a winter organ, whose pipes reach from earth to heaven   but at the same time sound a childhood echo of the small white   churches in Dalarna.
The unity of his work is a rarity in our time. If one asks about   Karlfeldt’s main problem, one word may serve as an answer:   self-discipline. His originality grew on the soil of a pagan and   luxuriant wilderness, and he would not have been drawn so often   to witch motifs and the pitchy brew of Uriel if he had not felt   the presence of demons. The muffled tumult of nature under the   moon of pagan festivals is one of the visions that he evokes. The   contrast between the heavy intoxication of the blood and the pure   celestial yearnings of the soul recurs constantly in his poetry.   Yet the different elements never destroy each other. He tames   them as does an artist by remaining faithful to himself and by   giving a personal touch even to the smallest detail.
In Karlfeldt we find scarcely a single expression of poetic   self-consciousness. The increasing response to his work would   have made such an expression superfluous even if his solid   peasant blood had not been a protection against aesthetic   arrogance. We find everywhere proof of the integrity of   professional honour that is revealed in beautiful and permanent   work. In an age in which handmade things have become rare, there   is a new and almost moral value in the masterly, chiselled, and   resonant language of his verse.
Karlfeldt’s poetry possesses precisely this stamp of miraculous   perfection. Which of us does not remember such stanzas ringing   like bells or vibrating like strings, but above all sung with   that peculiar and resounding voice that differs from all others?   Perhaps we should remember in this context the beautiful song   about the old turner, the village craftsman, who played the   fiddle for the people on the banks of the Opplimen and made   spinning wheels for them…
In all great poetry there is an interrelation between tradition   and experiment, and the principles of renewal and conservation   are contained in such poetry. The national tradition survives in   Karlfeldt because it is renewed personally and has the character   of a conquest dearly bought. We may rejoice that this poet, whose   inspiration is drawn predominantly from a past that is   disappearing or has disappeared, is thoroughly unconventional in   his means of expression and shows daring innovations, whereas   busy modernists often content themselves with following the   latest trends and fads. Nor can there be any doubt that, despite   his provincial subject matter, the singer of Dalarna is one of   the contemporary poets who have most boldly tried the wings of   imagination and experimented with the possibilities of poetic   form.
Thus the decision to honour the poetry of Erik Axel Karlfeldt   with this year’s Nobel Prize is intended as an expression of   justice by international standards. Death has stepped between the   laureate and his reward; under the circumstances the Prize will   be given to his family. He has left us, but his work remains. The   tragic world of chance is outshone by the imperishable summer   realm of poetry. Before our eyes we see the tomb in the dusk of   winter. At the same time we hear the great victorious harmonies   sung by the happiness of the creative genius; we feel the scents   from the Northern pleasure garden that his poetry created for the   comfort and joy of all receptive hearts.
At the banquet, Professor C.W. Oseen spoke   about the deceased laureate, «Is there nothing that is only   beneficial, to humanity as well as to the individual? Perhaps   there is! What the poems of Erik Axel Karlfeldt have meant to the   Swedish people, you, honoured guests, cannot know, but for us it   remains unforgettable. For thirty-five years they have   accompanied the ups and downs of our lives. That nothing may   emerge from Karlfeldt’s work, this world of beauty, for the   benefit of humanity and the individual, I cannot believe, I will   not believe. And yet – how far are we from the intentions of   Alfred Nobel even here? Out of the prize meant to help a needy   artist we have made a wreath, a wreath to adorn the coffin of our   most beloved poet.
If today’s award does not strictly follow Nobel’s intentions,   does that mean that the result of this procedure will be less   than what Nobel intended? I say not! What we have created is not   less but more! This festive ceremony is a tribute to genius. It   may not have much in common with Alfred Nobel’s dreams but it is   akin to his work. He was a genius himself His work has served   humanity, to build and to destroy. It has served and destroyed   life. The festive occasion we are celebrating is dedicated to   genius with its good and evil faces, with this double   significance, because we do not know what humanity needs most and   what furthers its prospering most: ‹good› or   ‹evil›. We dedicate this ceremony to genius, brother   of madness, to whom we owe everything that makes our lives   worthwhile.»
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
