Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1932
Nobel Prize in Literature 1932
John Galsworthy
- John Galsworthy
Swedish Academy
, on December 10, 1932
When we survey John Galsworthy’s   authorship, it seems to develop unusually smoothly, pushed on by   a conscientious and indefatigable creative impulse. Yet he is not   one of those who have turned to the literary career rapidly and   without resistance. Born, as the English put it, with a silver   spoon in his mouth, that is, economically independent, he studied   at Harrow and Oxford, chose the law without practising it,   and travelled all over the world. When, at the age of   twenty-eight, he began writing for the first time, the immediate   reason was the exhortation of a woman friend, and it was to   Galsworthy a mere recreation, evidently not without the inherent   prejudices of the gentleman, against the vocation of writing. His   first two collections of tales were published under the pen name   of John Sinjohn, and the editions were soon withdrawn by the   self-critical beginner. Not until he was thirty-seven did he   begin his real authorship by publishing the novel
The Island   Pharisees
(1904), and two years later appeared
The Man of   Property
, the origin of his fame and at the same time of his   monumental chief work,
The Forsyte Saga
.
In Galsworthy’s satire against the Island Pharisees, the   fundamental feature that was to mark all his subsequent works was   already apparent. The book deals with an English gentleman’s   having stayed abroad long enough to forget his conventional   sphere of thoughts and feelings; he criticizes the national   surroundings severely, and in doing so he is assisted by a   Belgian vagabond, who casually makes his acquaintance in an   English railway compartment and who becomes his fate. At that   time Galsworthy was himself a cosmopolite returned home, prepared   to fight against the old capitalistic aristocratic society with   about the same program as
Bernard   Shaw
, although the Englishman, contrary to the Irishman who   fought with intellectual arms, above all aimed at capturing   feeling and imagination. The pharisaical egoism of England’s   ruling classes, the subject of Galsworthy’s debut, remained his   program for the future, only specialized in his particular works.   He never tired of fighting against all that seemed narrow and   harsh in the national character, and the persistence of his   attacks on social evil indicates his strong impressions and   deeply wounded feeling of justice.
With the Forsyte type he now aimed at the upper middle class, the   rich businessmen, a group not yet having reached real gentility,   but striving with its sympathies and instincts toward the   well-known ideal of the gentleman of rigid, imperturbable, and   imposing correctness. These people are particularly on their   guard against dangerous feelings, a fact which, however, does not   exclude accidental lapses, when passion intrudes upon their life,   and liberty claims its rights in a world of property instincts.   Beauty, here represented by Irene, does not like to live with
The Man of Property
; in his bitter indignation at this,   Soames Forsyte becomes almost a tragic figure. It seems uncertain   if in the beginning Galsworthy thought of a sequel to that first   Forsyte novel, which is a masterpiece of an energetic, firm, and   independent account of human nature. At any rate it was not until   fifteen years later that he again took up his Forsytes, and at   this time the effects of the World War had radically changed the   perspective. But now this work expanded;
In Chancery
(1920) and
To Let
(1921) and two short story interludes   were added, and thus
The Forsyte Saga
proper was   completed. Not finished with the younger members of the family,   Galsworthy wrote
A Modern Comedy
, a new trilogy whose   structure is exactly like that of its predecessor and consists of   the three novels,
The White Monkey
(1924),
The Silver   Spoon
(1926), and
Swan Song
(1928), united by two   short story interludes. These two trilogies together form an   unusual literary accomplishment. The novelist has carried the   history of his time through three generations, and his success in   mastering so excellently his enormously difficult material, both   in its scope and in its depth, remains an extremely memorable   feat in English literature – doubly remarkable, if we consider   that it was performed in a field in which the European continent   had already produced some of its best works.
In the foreground of this chronicle is everyday reality, as   experienced by the Forsytes, all personal fortunes, conflicts,   and tragicomedies. But in the background is visible the dark   fabric of historical events. Every reader is sure to remember the   chapter describing how Soames with his second wife witnesses the   funeral of Queen Victoria in grey weather at the Hyde Park fence,   and the rapid survey of the age from her accession to the throne:   «Morals had changed, manners had changed, men had become   monkeys twice removed, God had become Mammon – Mammon so   respectable as to deceive himself.» In the Forsyte novels we   observe the transformation and the dissolution of the Victorian   age up to our days. In the first trilogy comes to life the period   that in England effected the fusion of nobility and plutocracy   with the accompanying change of the notion of a   «gentleman», a kind of Indian summer of wealth before   the days of the storm. The second trilogy, no longer called   «saga» but «comedy», describes the profound   crisis of the new England whose task is to change the ruins of   the past and the improvised barracks of wartime into its future   home. The gallery of types is admirably complete. Robust   businessmen, spoiled society ladies, aunts touching in an   old-fashioned way, rebellious young girls, gentlemen of the   clubs, politicians, artists, children, and even dogs – these   last-mentioned especially favoured by Galsworthy – emerge in the   London panorama in a concrete form, alive before our eyes and   ears.
The situations recur as a curious documentation of the   oscillation and the undulation in a family of given hereditary   dispositions. The individual portraits are distinguished, and the   law of social life is at work.
It is also instructive, however, to observe in these novels how   Galsworthy’s view gradually changes. The radical critic of   culture rises by degrees to a greater objectivity in his   appreciation and to a more liberal view of the purely human. An   often cited example of this is his treatment of Soames, this   standard national type, at first satirized, but then described   with a respect that, reluctantly growing, finally changes into a   genuine sympathy. Galsworthy has seized upon this sympathy; his   characterization of Soames’s personality thoroughly worked out   becomes the most memorable feature of the Forsyte saga and the   comedy of the descendants. One easily remembers one of those   masterly final episodes of
Swan Song
, in which Old Soames,   having driven to his ancestors’ village on the west coast, finds   with the help of an old census map the place where the Forsytes’   farm had been situated, where only a single stone marks the site.   Something like the ghost of a path leads him down into a valley   of grass and furze. He breathes in the fresh, rough sea air which   goes a little to his head; he puts on his overcoat and sits   musing, his back against the stone. Had his ancestors built the   house themselves at this lonely place, had they been the first to   settle down here? he wonders. Their England rises before him, an   England «of pack horses and very little smoke, of peat and   wood fires, and wives who never left you, because they couldn’t   probably». He sits there a long time, absorbed in his   feeling for the birthplace.
«And something moved in him, as if the salty independence of   that lonely spot were still in his bones. Old Jolyon and his own   father and the rest of his uncles – no wonder they’d been   independent, with this air and loneliness in their blood; and   crabbed with the pickling of it – unable to give up, to let go,   to die. For a moment he seemed to understand even   himself.»
To Galsworthy Soames thus becomes one of the last representatives   of static old England. There was no humbug in him, we are told;   he had his trying ways, but he was genuine. The sober prosaic   respectability is in this manner duly honoured in Galsworthy’s   realism, and this has been pointed out as the essential factor in   his judgment of human nature. As time passed, and the weary,   cynical laxity grew more and more visibly modern, the chronicler   found that several traits which under other circumstances had   been little appreciated, perhaps really constituted the secret of   the British power of resistance. On the whole, Galsworthy’s later   novels are permeated with a patriotic feeling of self-defence   that appears also in his descriptions of the home and studies of   nature. Even these last-mentioned are rendered with a more tender   and more anxious poetry, with the feeling of protecting something   precious yet already shadowed by certain loss. It may be old   chambers where people have established themselves as if to remain   there forever. Or it may be an English garden park, where the   September sun is shining beautifully on bronze-coloured beech   leaves and centenary hedges of yew.
Time does not permit me to dwell in the same detail upon other of   Galsworthy’s works, often quite comparable in quality to the   Forsyte series, which surpasses them by virtue of its epic   dimensions. It is above all in
The Country House
(1907),   in
Fraternity
(1901), and in
The Dark Flower
(1913)   that his mature essential character is to be sought. In the novel   of the manor he created perhaps his most exquisite female   portrait, Mrs. Pendyce, the type of the perfect, unaffected lady   with all the modest tragedy which surrounds a truly noble nature,   condemned to be restrained if not destroyed by the fetters of   tradition. In
Fraternity
he represented, with a discreet   mixture of pity and irony, the unfulfilled martyr of social   conscience, the aesthete who is tortured by the shadows of the   proletarian masses in London, but is not able to take the   decisive step and carry out his altruistic impulse of action.   There we also meet the old original Mr. Stone, the utopian   dreamer with his eternal monologues beneath the night sky, indeed   one of Galsworthy’s most memorable types. Nor do we forget
The   Dark Flower
, which may be called a psychological sonata,   played with a masterly hand and based on the variations of   passion and resignation in the ages of man. Even in the form of   the short story Galsworthy has often been able to evoke an   emotional response through contrasts of shadow and light which   work rather graphically. He can do this in only a few pages which   become animated by his personal style, for example, when he tells   about such a simple case as that of the German shoemaker in   «Quality», the story of the hopeless struggle of good   craftsmanship against low-price industry.
By appealing to education and the sense of justice, his narrative   art has always gently influenced contemporary notions of life and   habits of thought. The same is true of his dramatic works, which   were often direct contributions to social discussion and led to   definite reforms at least in one area, the administration of   public prisons in England. His dramas show an unusual richness of   ideas combined with great ingenuity and technical skill in the   working out of scenic effect. When certain inclinations are   found, they are always just and humane. In
The Forest
(1924), for example, he brands the inconsiderate spirit of greed   that, for crass purposes, exploits the heroism of the British   world-conquering mind.
The Show
(1925) represents the   defencelessness of the individual against the press in a family   tragedy where brutal newspaper curiosity functions like a deaf   and unchecked machine, removing the possibility of any one being   held responsible for the resultant evil.
Loyalties
depicts a matter of honour in which loyalty is   tested and impartially examined in the different circles where it   is at work, that is, the family, the corporation, the profession,   and the nation. The force of these and other plays is in their   logical structure and their concentrated action; sometimes they   also possess an atmosphere of poetic feeling that is far from   trivial. I am thinking especially of
A Pigeon
(1912) and
A Bit o’ Love
(1915) which, however, did not meet with   such brilliant success on the stage. Although on the whole   Galsworthy’s plays cannot be rated artistically with his novels,   they confirm quite as plainly how strongly he sticks to his early   ideal of liberty, that which in Shelley put on the wings and   flames of dawn. Even in his rather cool dramatic works we meet a   steady enemy of all oppression, spiritual as well as material, a   sensitive man who with all his heart reacts against lack of   consideration and never gives way in his demand for fair   play.
In technique Turgenev is one of his first teachers. As in the   charming Russian narrator, we find in Galsworthy a definite   musical charm catching and keeping the hidden feelings. His   intuition is so infallible that he can content himself with a   slight allusion and a broken hint. But then there is Galsworthy’s   irony, such a singular instrument that even the tone separates   him from any other writer. There are many different kinds of   irony. One principal kind is negative and can be compared to the   hoar-frost of the windows in a house where there is no fire,   where the hearth has grown cold long ago. But there is also an   irony friendly to life, springing from warmth, interest, and   humanity; such is Galsworthy’s. His is an irony that, in the   presence of tragicomic evil, seems to question why it must be so,   why it is necessary, and whether there is nothing to remedy it.   Sometimes Galsworthy makes nature herself take part in that   ironic play about human beings, to underline the bitterness or   sweetness of the incidents with the help of winds, clouds,   fragrances, and bird cries. Assisted by this irony he   successfully appeals to the psychological imagination, always the   best ally of understanding and sympathy.
Galsworthy once formulated his artistic motto in words such as   harmony, proportion, balance. They mark his natural turn of mind,   a spiritual ideal, now often suspect, perhaps because it is so   difficult to reach. We soon discover that this poet who so   severely and persistently attacked the typical gentleman of   self-sufficiency, himself indisputably succeeded in filling the   old notion with new life, so that it preserved its contact with   both the immediately human and the unrestricted aesthetic   instinct. In the artist Galsworthy flourish exactly those   qualities of temper that in English are comprehended in this   word:
gentleness
. These qualities are expressed in his   works, and in this way they have become a cultural contribution   to our own times.
As Mr. Galsworthy has unfortunately been prevented by illness   from being here today, as he had wished, to receive personally   the Nobel Prize in Literature for 1932, it will now be delivered   to the representative of Great Britain here present, Minister   Clark Kerr.
Your Excellency – May I ask you to receive from His Majesty’s   hands the Nobel Prize in Literature, awarded to your famous   countryman.
At the banquet, Gunnar Holmgren, Rector of
the Caroline   Institute
, made these remarks: «Finally, we are today   paying homage to John Galsworthy. If this our homage is marked by   a feeling of very special warmth, it is largely because his noble   personality and his exquisite artistic gifts, as displayed in his   numerous literary works, have long been famous and highly   appreciated all over the world. But the reason is no less to be   found in that spirit of idealism, that warm sympathy and true   humanity that radiate from all his writings and render him   especially worthy to receive a gift from Alfred Nobel’s   Foundation. We regret very deeply that unfortunate circumstances   have prevented John Galsworthy from being present here today. We   should have been happy indeed to have had the privilege at the   same time of honouring in his person the incarnation of that   high-minded and idealistic England which we all love and admire.   I beg to request His Excellency the British Minister kindly to   convey to him our sincere greetings and heartiest   congratulations.»
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
