Enhanced Page Navigation
Nobel Prize in Literature 1933 - Presentation Speech
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1933
Nobel Prize in Literature 1933
Ivan Bunin
- Ivan Bunin
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1933
Ivan Bunin’s literary career has been clear   and uncomplicated. He came from a family of country squires and   grew up in the literary tradition of the times in which that   social class dominated Russian culture, created a literature   occupying a place of honour in contemporary Europe, and led to   fatal political movements. «The lords of the scrupulous   consciences» is what the following generation ironically   called these men who, full of indignation and pity, set   themselves up against the humiliation of the serfs. They deserved   a better name, for they would soon have to pay with their own   prosperity for the upheaval that they were going to cause.
Only the debris of the family possessions remained about the   young Bunin; it was in the world of poetry that he could feel a   strong rapport with the past generations. He lived in a world of   illusions without any energy, rather than of national sentiment   and hope for the future. Nonetheless he did not escape the   influence of the reform movement; as a student, he was deeply   struck by the appeal of Tolstoy’s proclaiming fraternity with the   humble and poor. Thus he learned like others to live by the toil   of his hands, and for his part he chose the craft of cooper in   the home of a co-religionist who greatly loved discussion. (He   might well have tried a less difficult craft-the staves come   apart easily, and it takes much skill to make a vessel that will   hold its content.)
For a guide in more spiritual doctrines he had a man who fought   with wavering energy against the temptations of the flesh in a   very literal sense, and here vegetarianism entered his doctrine.   During a voyage with him to Tolstoy’s home to be presented to the   master – Bunin was able to observe his victories and defeats. He   was victorious over several refreshment stands in railroad   stations but finally the temptation of the meat pâtés   was too strong. Having finished chewing, he found ingenious   excuses for his particular fall: «I know, however, that it   is not the pâté that holds me in its power but I who   hold it. I am not its slave; I eat when I want to; when I don’t   want to, I don’t eat.» It goes without saying that the young   student did not want to stay long in this company.
Tolstoy himself did not attach great importance to Bunin’s   religious zeal. «You wish to live a simple and industrious   life? That is good, but don’t be priggish about it. One can be an   excellent man in all kinds of lives.» And of the profession   of poet he said, «Oh well, write if you have a great fancy   for it, but remember well that it can never be the goal of your   life.» This warning was lost on Bunin; he was already a poet   with all his being.
He quickly attracted attention for verses that followed austere   classical models; their subject was often descriptions of   melancholic beauty of past life in the old manors. At the same   time he developed in prose poems his power to render nature with   all the fullness and richness of his impressions, having   exercised his faculties with an extraordinary subtlety to   reproduce them faithfully. Thus he continued the art of the great   realists while his contemporaries devoted themselves to the   adventures of literary programs: symbolism, neo-naturalism,   Adamism, futurism, and other names of such passing phenomena. He   remained an isolated man in an extremely agitated era.
When Bunin was forty, his novel
Derévnya
(1910)   [
The Village
] made him famous and indeed notorious, for   the book provoked a violent discussion. He attacked the essential   point of the Russian faith in the future, the Slavophiles’ dream   of the virtuous and able peasant, through whom the nation must   someday cover the world with its shadow. Bunin replied to this   thesis with an objective description of the real nature of the   peasants’ virtues. The result was one of the most sombre and   cruel works even in Russian literature, where such works are by   no means rare.
The author gives no historical explanation of the decadence of   the
muzhikí
, except for the brief information that   the grandfather of the two principal characters in the novel was   deliberately tracked to death by his master’s greyhounds. This   deed expresses well, in fact, the imprint borne by the spirit of   the suppressed. But Bunin shows them just as they are without   hesitating before any horror, and it was easy for him to prove   the truthfulness of his severe judgment. Violence of the most   cruel kind had recently swept the province in the wake of the   first revolution – a foreshadowing of a later one.
For lack of another name, the book is called a novel in the   translations but it really bears little resemblance to that   genre. It consists of a series of immensely tumultuous episodes   from lower life; truth of detail has meant everything to the   author. The critic questioned not so much the details but their   disinterested selection – the foreigner cannot judge the validity   of the criticism. Now the book has had a strong revival because   of events since then, and it remains a classic work, the model of   a solid, concentrated, and sure art, in the eyes of the Russian   émigrés as well as of those in the homeland. The   descriptions of villages were continued in many shorter essays,   sometimes devoted to the religious element which, in the eyes of   the enthusiastic national generation, made the
muzhikí
the people of promise. In the writer’s   pitiless analysis the redemptive piety of the world is reduced to   anarchic instincts and to the taste for self-humiliation,   essential traits of the Russian spirit according to him. He was   indeed far from his youthful Tolstoyian faith. But he had   retained one thing from it: his love of the Russian land. He has   hardly ever painted his marvellous countryside with such great   art as in some of these novellas. It is as if he had done it to   preserve himself, to be able to breathe freely once more after   all he had seen of the ugly and the false.
In a quite different spirit
Sukhodól
(1911-12), the   short novel of a manor, was written as a counterpart to
Derévnya
. The book is not a portrayal of the present   times, but of the heyday of the landed proprietors, as remembered   by an old servant in the house where Bunin grew up. The author is   not an optimist in this book, either; these masters have little   vital force, they are as unworthy of being responsible for their   own destinies and those of their subordinates as the severest   accuser could have desired. In effect one finds here in large   measure the materials for that defence of the people which Bunin   silently passed over in
Derévnya
.
But nonetheless the picture appears now in a totally different   light; it is filled with poetry. This is due in part to the kind   of reconciliation that the past possesses, having paid its debt   by death; but also to the sweet vision of the servant who gives   charm to the confused and changing world in which, however, her   youth was ruined. But the chief source of poetry is the author’s   imaginative power, his faculty for giving this book, with an   intense concentration, the richness of life.
Sukhodól
is a literary work of
very
high order.
During the years which remained before the World War, Bunin made   long trips through the Mediterranean countries and to the Far   East. They provided him with the subjects of a series of exotic   novellas, sometimes inspired by the world of Hindu ideas, with   its peace in the abnegation of life, but more often by the   strongly accentuated contrast between the dreaming Orient and the   harsh and avid materialism of the West. When the war came, these   studies in the spirit of the modern globe-trotters with the   imprint created by the world tragedy were to result in the   novella that came to be his most famous work:
Gospodín iz   San Francisco
(1916) [
The Gentleman from San   Francisco
].
As often elsewhere, Bunin here simplifies the subject extremely   by restricting himself to developing the principal idea with   types rather than complex characters. Here he seems to have a   special reason for this method: it is as if the author were   afraid to come too close to his figures because they awaken his   indignation and his hate. The American multi-millionaire, who   after a life of ceaseless thirst for money, sets out as an old   man into the world to refresh the dry consciousness of his power,   his blindness of soul, and his avidity for senile pleasure,   interests the author only in so far as he can show in what a   pitiable manner he succumbs, like a bursting bubble. It is as if   a judgment of the pitiless world were pronounced against his   character. In place of a portrait of this pitifully insignificant   man, the novella gives by its singularly resolute art a portrait   of destiny, the enemy of this man, without any mysticism but only   with strictly objective description of the game of the forces of   nature with human vanity. The mystical feeling, however, is   awakened in the reader and becomes stronger and greater through   the perfect command of language and tone.
Gospodín iz San   Francisco
was immediately accepted as a literary masterpiece;   but it was also something else: the portent of an increasing   world twilight; the condemnation of the essential guilt in the   tragedy; the distortion of human culture which pushed the world   to the same fate.
The consequences of the war expelled the author from his country,   so dear to him despite everything, and it seemed a duty to remain   silent under the severe pressure of what he had suffered. But his   lost country lived again doubly dear in his memory, and regret   gave him more pity for men. Still, he sometimes, with stronger   reason, painted his particular enemy, the muzhík, with a   sombre clear-sightedness of all his vices and faults; but   sometimes he looked forward. Under all repellent things, he saw   something of indestructible humanity, which he represented not   with moral stress but as a force of nature, full of the immense   possibilities of life. «A tree of God», one of them   calls himself, «I see thus that God provides it; where the   wind goes, there I follow.» In this manner he has taken   leave of them for the present.
From the inexhaustible treasures of his memories of the Russian   nature, Bunin was later able to draw anew the joy and the desire   to create. He gave colour and brilliance to new Russian   destinies, conceived in the same austerity as in the era when he   lived among them. In Mítina lyubóv (1924-25)   [
Mitya’s Love
], he analyzed young feelings with all the   mastery of a psychology in which sense impressions and states of   mind, marvellously rendered, are particularly essential. The book   was very successful in his country, although it signalled the   return to literary traditions which, with many other things’ had   seemed condemned to death. In what has been published of
Zhizn   Arsénieva
(Part I,
Istóki dnéy
, 1930   [
The Well of Days
]), partially an autobiography he has   reproduced Russian life in a manner broader than ever before. His   old superiority as the incomparable painter of the vast and rich   beauty of the Russian land remains fully confirmed here.
In the literary history of his country, the place of Ivan Bunin   has been clearly defined and his importance recognized for a long   time and almost without divergence of opinions. He has followed   the great tradition of the brilliant era of the nineteenth   century in stressing the line of development which can be   continued. He perfected concentration and richness of expression   – of a description of real life based on an almost unique   precision of observation. With the most rigorous art he has well   resisted all temptations to forget things for the charm of words;   although by nature a lyric poet, he has never embellished what he   has seen but has rendered it with the most exact fidelity. To his   simple language he has added a charm which, according to the   testimonies of his compatriots, has made of it a precious drink   that one can often sense even in the translations. This ability   is his eminent and secret talent, and it gives the imprint of the   masterpiece to his literary work.
Mr. Bunin – I have tried to present a picture of your work and of   that austere art which characterizes it, a picture doubtlessly   quite incomplete because of the little time at my disposal for a   task so demanding. Please receive now, sir, from the hands of His   Majesty the King, those marks of distinction which the Swedish   Academy is conferring on you, together with its heartfelt   congratulations.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
