Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1934
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 1934
Nobel Prize in Literature 1934
Luigi Pirandello
- Luigi Pirandello
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1934
The work of Luigi Pirandello is extensive.   As an author of novellas he certainly is without equal in output,   even in the primary country of this literary genre. Boccaccio’s
Decameron
contains one hundred novellas; Pirandello’s
Novelle per un anno
(1922-37) has one for each day of the   year. They offer much variation in subject matter as well as in   character: descriptions of life either purely realistic or   philosophically profound or paradoxical, as often marked by   humour as by satire. There are also creations of a jaunty poetic   imagination in which the demands of reality give way to an ideal   and creative truth.
The common feature of all these novellas is the effortless   improvisation that gives them spontaneity, élan, and life.   But since the limited scope of the novella demands a particularly   strict composition, we also find the result of improvisation. In   his hurried treatment of the subject Pirandello may soon lose   control, without any concern for the overall impression. Although   his novellas reveal much originality, they are hardly   representative of the accomplished master; this is readily   apparent when one notes the many motifs which were later employed   in his dramatic work.
Nor do his novels mark the zenith of his literary achievement.   Although his early novels were imbued with the same ideas with   which he made his profoundly original contribution to the modern   theatre, he reserved the definitive shaping of these ideas for   the theatre.
In the short survey that is possible here, we can mention only   one of these novels in which a distinctive feature of his concept   of our times, his disgust and fear of materialism which   mechanizes life, appears most strongly. The novel is
Si   gira
(1916) [
Shoot!
], titled after a technical term of   the cinema, «Shoot one». The expression warns the   actors when the shooting of a scene begins. The narrator is the   one who «shoots», that is, the cameraman of a large   film industry. He finds a special meaning in his work. For him,   life with all its good and evil is reduced to the material of   images mechanically produced for a thoughtless pastime; it has no   other purpose. The photographic apparatus becomes a demon which   swallows everything and unrolls it on the film reel, thus giving   it an outward appearance of reality, an appearance which is, in   essence, spiritual death and emptiness. Our modern existence   revolves and runs with the same lifeless speed, completely   mechanized as if it were destroyed and annihilated. The author’s   attitude is expressed with extreme intensity. The mere plot is   devastating enough.
That is the background of Pirandello’s dramas, limited as they   most often are to purely psychological problems. The bitterness   of our present era must have had much influence on the plays’   pessimistic philosophy even if this philosophy is based on the   author’s nature.
Maschere Nude
(1918-21), the title he gave to his   collection of plays, is difficult to translate because of its   complexity. Literally this expressions means «naked   masks», but «masks» usually indicates a bare   surface. In this case, however, the word is applied to the   disguise which hides one from others and from one’s self and   which signifies to Pirandello the form of the selfa surface with   an unfathomable being behind it. «Veiled» masks,   analyzed and dissolved with penetrating clarity: this is the   portrayal of human beings in his dramas – men are unmasked. That   is the meaning of the phrase.
The most remarkable feature of Pirandello’s art is his almost   magical power to turn psychological analysis into good theatre.   Usually the theatre requires human stereotypes; here the spirit   is like a shadow, obscurity behind obscurity, and one cannot   decide what is more or less central inside. Finally one racks his   brains, for there is no centre. Everything is relative, nothing   can be grasped completely, and yet the plays can sometimes seize,   captivate, and charm even the great international public. This   result is wholly paradoxical. As the author himself explained, it   depends on the fact that his works «arise out of images   taken from life which have passed through a filter of ideas and   which hold me completely captive». It is the image which is   fundamental, not, as many have believed, the abstract idea   disguised afterwards by an image.
It has been said that Pirandello has but a «single»,   idea, the illusory nature of the personality, of the   «I». The charge is easy to prove. The author is indeed   obsessed with that idea. However, even if the idea is expanded to   include the relativity of everything man believes he sees and   understands, this charge is unfair.
Pirandello’s dramatic art did not at first break with general   literary tendencies. He treated social and ethical problems, the   conflict between parenthood and the social structure with its   inflexible notions of honour and decency, and the difficulties   that human goodness finds in protecting itself against the same   adversaries. All this was presented in morally as well as   logically complicated situations and ended either in victory or   defeat. These problems had their natural counterpart in the   analysis of the «I» of the characters who were as   relative as the idea against which they were fighting.
In several of his plays it is the idea others have of a   personality and the effect they experience from it which becomes   the principal subject. Others know us only as we know them,   imperfectly; and yet we make definitive judgments. It is under   the atmospheric pressure of these judgments that the   consciousness of one’s self can be changed. In
Tutto per   bene
(1920) [
All For The Best
] this psychological   process is carried to its conclusion. In
Vestire gli   ignudi
(1923) [
To Clothe the Naked
] the motif is   turned upside down and assumes a moving tragic character. A lost   life, an «I», no longer finding anything in itself,   desires death but, turning entirely to the outside, has a last   pathetic wish to have a proper shroud in the beautifying idea   which others have of its former being. In this gripping play even   Iying appears by its anguish as a kind of innocence.
But the author does not stop here; several of his plays deal with   the lie in the world of relativity and examine with a penetrating   logic how more or less criminal this lie is. In
La vita che ti   diedi
(1924) [
The Life I Gave You
] the right to   unreality receives beautiful and great expression. A woman,   having lost her only son, no longer has anything which holds her   to life; yet the very violence of the blow reawakens in her a   strength which dispels death, as light dispels darkness. All has   become shadows; she feels that not only herself but all existence   is «such stuff as dreams are made of». In her heart she   guards both the memory and the dream, and now they are able to   surpass all other things. The son to whom she gave life, who   always filled her soul, fills it still. There no void is   possible; the son cannot be removed. He remains in her presence,   a form she cannot grasp; she feels him there as much as she is   able to feel anything. Thus the relativity of truth has taken the   shape of a simple and sublime mystery.
The same relativity appears as an enigma in
Così é   (se vipare)
(1918) [
Right You Are (If You Think You   Are)
]. The play is called a parable, which means that its   singular story makes no pretensions to reality. It is a bold and   ingenious fabrication which imparts wisdom. The circumstances of   a family, recently settled in a provincial city, become   intolerable to the other inhabitants of the town. Of the three   members of the family, the husband, the wife, and the   mother-in-law, either the husband or the mother-in-law, each   otherwise reasonable, must be viewed as seized with absurd ideas   about the identity of the wife. The last speaker always has the   final say on the issue, but a comparison of the conflicting   statements leaves it in doubt. The questionings and the   confrontation of the two characters are described with great   dramatic art and with a knowledge of the most subtle maladies of   the soul. The wife should be able to resolve the puzzle, but when   she appears she is veiled like the goddess of knowledge and   speaks mysteriously; to each of the interested parties she   represents what she must be in order for that person to preserve   his image of her. In reality she is the symbol of the truth which   no one can grasp in its entirety.
The play is also a brilliant satire on man’s curiosity and false   wisdom; in it Pirandello presents a catalogue of types and   reveals a penetrating self-conceit, either partially or   completely ridiculous, in those attempting to discover truth. The   whole remains a masterpiece in its own right.
The central problem in the author’s dramatic work, however, is   the analysis of the «I» – its dissolution in contrary   elements, the negation of its unity as illusory, and the   symbolical description of the
Maschere nude
. Thanks to the   inexhaustible productivity of his mind, Pirandello attacks the   problem from different sides, some of which have already been   mentioned.
By sounding the depths of madness, he makes important   discoveries. In the tragedy of
Enrico IV
(1922) [
Henry   IV
], for example, the strongest impression comes from the   struggle of the personality for its identity in the eternally   flowing torrent of time. In
Il giuoco delle parti
(19191)   [
The Rules of the Game
] Pirandello creates a drama of pure   abstractions: he uses the artificial notions of duty to which   members of society can be subjected by the force of tradition   with resolute logic for an action completely contrary to   expectation. As by a stroke of a magic wand, the game of   abstractions fills the scene ith an extremely captivating   life.
Sei Personaggi in cerca d’autore
(1921) [
Six Characters   in Search of an Author
] is a game similar to that described   earlier and at the same time its very opposite; it is both   profoundly serious and full of ideas. Here unrestrained creative   imagination rather than abstraction dominates. It is the true   drama of poetic creation; it is also the settling of accounts   between the theatre and truth, between appearance and reality.   Moreover, it is the half-despairing message of art to the soul of   a ravaged age, of fragmentary scenes both fulminating and   explosive. This flood of violent feeling and superior   intellectuality, rich in poetry, is truly the inspiration of   genius. The world-wide success of the play, which proves that it   has to some extent been understood, is as extraordinary as the   piece itself There is neither the necessity nor the time to   recall its magically startling details.
The sceptical psychology on which Pirandello has based his   remarkable production is purely negative. If it were adopted by   the general public with the same naiveté with which new and   bold ideas are generally received, it would indeed entail more   than one risk. But there is no danger that this will happen. It   applies itself to purely intellectual realms and the general   public scarcely follows it there. If by chance someone might be   persuaded that his «I» is a fiction, he would soon be   convinced that in practice this «I» does possess a   certain degree of reality. Just as it is impossible to prove the   freedom of the will, which is however constantly proved by   experience, so the «I» manifestly finds means to make   itself remembered. These means are gross or subtle. The most   subtle of them perhaps consists in the faculty of thought itself;   among others, the thought which wants to annihilate the   «I».
But the analytical work of this great writer retains its value,   especially if compared to several other things to which we have   been treated in our time. Psychological analysis has given us   complexes, which have spread immense pleasure and joy. They have   even been worshipped as fetishes by apparently pious minds.   Barbarous fetishes! To a person with some visual imagination,   they resemble seaweed entangled in the water. Small fish often   hover before this seaweed meditating until, their heads clear at   last, they sink into it and disappear. Pirandello’s scepticism   protects us from such adventures; furthermore, he can help us. He   warns us not to touch the delicate tissue of the human soul in a   coarsely dogmatic and blind manner.
As a moralist, Pirandello is neither paradoxical nor destructive.   Good remains good, and evil, evil. A nobly old-fashioned humanity   dominates his ideas about the world of men. His bitter pessimism   has not stifled his idealism; his penetrating analytical reason   has not cut the roots of life. Happiness does not occupy a large   place in the world of his imagination, but what gives dignity to   life still finds enough air to breathe in it.
Dear Dr. Pirandello – Mine was the difficult task of presenting a   concise synopsis of your profound literary work. Although such a   brief sketch is hardly adequate, I have carried out my charge   with pleasure.
May I now ask you to receive from His Majesty the Nobel Prize in   Literature, of which the Swedish Academy has deemed you   worthy.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
