Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1936
Nobel Prize in Literature 1936
Eugene O'Neill
- Eugene O'Neill
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1936
Eugene O’Neill’s dramatic production has   been of a sombre character from the very first, and for him life   as a whole quite early came to signify tragedy.
This has been attributed to the bitter experiences of his youth,   more especially to what he underwent as a sailor. The legendary   nimbus that gathers around celebrities in his case took the form   of heroic events created out of his background. With his contempt   for publicity, O’Neill straightway put a stop to all such   attempts; there was no glamour to be derived from his drab   hardships and toils. We may indeed conclude that the stern   experiences were not uncongenial to his spirit, tending as they   did to afford release of certain chaotic forces within him.
His pessimism was presumably on the one hand an innate trait of   his being, on the other an offshoot of the literary current of   the age, though possibly it is rather to be interpreted as the   reaction of a profound personality to the American optimism of   old tradition. Whatever the source of his pessimism may have   been, however, the line of his development was marked out, and   O’Neill became by degrees the uniquely and fiercely tragic   dramatist that the world has come to know. The conception of life   that he presents is not a product of elaborate thinking, but it   has the genuine stamp of something lived through. It is based   upon an exceedingly intense, one might say, heart-rent,   realization of the austerity of life, side by side with a kind of   rapture at the beauty of human destinies shaped in the struggle   against odds.
A primitive sense of tragedy, as we see, lacking moral backing   and achieving no inner victory – merely the bricks and mortar for   the temple of tragedy in the grand and ancient style. By his very   primitiveness, however, this modern tragedian has reached the   well-spring of this form of creative art, a naive and simple   belief in fate. At certain stages it has contributed a stream of   pulsating life-blood to his work.
That was, however, at a later period. In his earliest dramas   O’Neill was a strict and somewhat arid realist; those works we   may here pass by. Of more moment were a series of one-act plays,   based upon material assembled during his years at sea. They   brought to the theatre something novel, and hence he attracted   attention.
Those plays were not, however, dramatically notable; properly   speaking, merely short stories couched in dialogue-form; true   works of art, however, of their type, and heart-stirring in their   simple, rugged delineation. In one of them,
The Moon of the   Caribbees
(1918), he attains poetic heights, partly by the   tenderness in depicting the indigence of a sailor’s life with its   naive illusions of joy, and pertly by the artistic background of   the play: dirge-like Negro songs coming from a white coral shore   beneath metallically glittering palms and the great moon of the   Caribbean Sea. Altogether it is a mystical weave of melancholy,   primitive savagery, yearning, lunar effulgence, and oppressive   desolateness.
The drama
Anna Christie
(1921) achieves its most striking   effect through the description of sailors’ life ashore in and   about waterfront saloons. The first act is O’Neill’s masterpiece   in the domain of strict realism, each character being depicted   with supreme sureness and mastery. The content is the raising of   a fallen Swedish girl to respectable human status by the strong   and wholesome influences of the sea; for once pessimism is left   out of the picture, the play having what is termed a happy   ending.
With his drama
The Hairy Ape
(1922), also concerned with   sailors’ lives, O’Neill launches into that expressionism which   sets its stamp upon his «ideadramas». The aim of   expressionism in literature and the plastic arts is difficult to   determine; nor need we discuss it, since for practical purposes a   brief description suffices. It endeavours to produce its effects   by a sort of mathematical method; it may be said to extract the   square root of the complex phenomena of reality, and build with   those abstractions a new world on an enormously magnified scale.   The procedure is an irksome one and can hardly be said to achieve   mathematical exactitude; for a long time, however, it met with   great success throughout the world.
The Hairy Ape
seeks to present on a monumental scale the   rebellious slave of steam power, intoxicated with his force and   with superman ideas. Outwardly he is a relapse to primitive man,   and he presents himself as a kind of beast, suffering from   yearning for genius. The play depicts his tragical discomfiture   and ruin on being brought up against cruel society.
Subsequently O’Neill devoted himself for a number of years to a   boldly expressionistic treatment of ideas and social questions.   The resulting plays have little connection with real life; the   poet and dreamer isolates himself, becoming absorbed in   feverishly pursued speculation and phantasy.
The Emperor Jones
(1920), as an artistic creation, stands   rather by itself; through it the playwright first secured any   considerable celebrity. The theme embraces the mental breakdown   of a Negro despot who rules over a Negro-populated island in the   West Indies. The despot perishes on the flight from his glory,   hunted in the dead of night by the troll-drums of his pursuers   and by recollections of the past shaping themselves as paralyzing   visions. These memories stretch back beyond his own life to the   dark continent of Africa. Here lies concealed the theory of the   individual’s unconscious inner life being the carrier of the   successive stages in the evolution of the race. As to the   rightness of the theory we need form no opinion; the play takes   so strong a hold upon our nerves and senses that our attention is   entirely absorbed.
The «dramas of ideas» proper are too numerous and too   diversified to be included in a brief survey. Their themes derive   from contemporary life or from sagas and legends; all are   metamorphosed by the author’s fancy. They play on emotional   chords all tightly strung, give amazing decorative effects, and   manifest a never-failing dramatic energy. Practically speaking,   everything in human life in the nature of struggle or combat has   here been used as a subject for creative treatment, solutions   being sought for and tried out of the spiritual or mental riddles   presented. One favourite theme is the cleavage of personality   that arises when an individual’s true character is driven in upon   itself by pressure from the world without, having to yield place   to a make-believe character, its own live traits being hidden   behind a mask. The dramatist’s musings are apt to delve so deep   that what he evolves has an urge, like deep-sea fauna, to burst   asunder on being brought into the light of day. The results he   achieves, however, are never without poetry; there is an abundant   flow of passionate, pregnant words. The action, too, yields   evidence in every case of the never-slumbering energy that is one   of O’Neill’s greatest gifts.
Underneath O’Neill’s fantastic love of experimenting, however, is   a hint of a yearning to attain the monumental simplicity   characteristic of ancient drama. In his
Desire Under the   Elms
(1924) he made an attempt in that irection, drawing his   motif from the New England farming community, hardened in te   progress of generations into a type of Puritanism that had   gradually come to forfeit its idealistic inspiration. The course   embarked upon was to be followed with more success in the   «Electra» trilogy.
In between appeared
A Play; Strange Interlude
(1928),   which won high praise and became renowned. It is rightly termed   «A Play», for with its broad and loose-knit method of   presentation it cannot be regarded as a tragedy; it would rather   seem most aptly defined as a psychological novel in scenes. To   its subtitle, «Strange Interlude», a direct clue is   given in the course of the play: «Life, the present, is the   strange interlude between the past and what is to come.» The   author tries to make his idea clear, as far as possible, by   resorting to a peculiar device: on the one hand, the characters   speak and reply as the action of the play demands; on the other,   they reveal their real natures and their recollections in the   form of monologues, inaudible to the other characters upon the   stage. Once again, the element of masking!
Regarded as a psychological novel, up to the point at which it   becomes too improbable for any psychology, the work is very   notable for its wealth of analytical and above all intuitive   acumen, and for the profound insight it displays into the inner   workings of the human spirit. The training bore fruit in the real   tragedy that followed, the author’s grandest work:
Mourning   Becomes Electra
(1931). Both in the story it unfolds and in   the destiny-charged atmosphere enshrouding it, this play keeps   close to the tradition of the ancient drama, though in both   respects it is adjusted to modern life and to modern lines of   thought. The scene of this tragedy of the modern-time house of   Atreus is laid in the period of the great Civil War, America’s
Iliad
. That choice lends the drama the clear perspective   of the past and yet provides it with a background of intellectual   life and thought sufficiently close to the present day. The most   remarkable feature in the drama is the way in which the element   of fate has been further developed. It is based upon up-to-date   hypotheses, primarily upon the natural-scientific determinism of   the doctrine of heredity, and also upon the Freudian omniscience   concerning the unconscious, the nightmare dream of perverse   family emotions.
These hypotheses are not, as we know, established beyond dispute,   but the all-important point regarding this drama is that its   author has embraced and applied them with unflinching   consistency, constructing upon their foundation a chain of events   as inescapable as if they had been proclaimed by the Sphinx of   Thebes herself; Thereby he has achieved a masterly example of   constructive ability and elaborate motivation of plot, and one   that is surely without a counterpart in the whole range of   latter-day drama. This applies especially to the first two parts   of the trilogy.
Two dramas, wholly different and of a new type for O’Neill,   followed. They constitute a characteristic illustration of the   way he has of never resting content with a result achieved, no   matter what success it may have met with. They also gave evidence   of his courage, for in them he launched a challenge to a   considerable section of those whose favourable opinions he had   won, and even to the dictators of those opinions. Though it may   not at the present time be dangerous to defy natural human   feelings and conceptions, it is not by any means free from risk   to prick the sensitive conscience of critics. In
Ah,   Wilderness
(1933) the esteemed writer of tragedies astonished   his admirers by presenting them with an idyllic middle-class   comedy and carried his audiences with him. In its depiction of   the spiritual life of young people the play contains a good deal   of poetry, while its gayer scenes display unaffected humour and   comedy; it is, moreover, throughout simple and human in its   appeal.
In
Days Without End
(1934) the dramatist tackled the   problem of religion, one that he had until then touched upon only   superficially, without identifying himself with it, and merely   from the natural scientist’s combative standpoint. In this play   he showed that he had an eye for the irrational, felt the need of   absolute values, and was alive to the danger of spiritual   impoverishment in the empty space that will be all that is left   over the hard and solid world of rationalism. The form the work   took was that of a modern miracle play, and perhaps, as with his   tragedies of fate, the temptation to experiment was of great   importance in its origination. Strictly observing the conventions   of the drama form chosen, he adopted medieval naiveté in his   presentation of the struggle of good against evil, introducing,   however, novel and bold features of stage technique. The   principal character he cleaves into two parts, white and black,   not only inwardly but also corporeally, each half leading its own   independent bodily life – a species of Siamese twins   contradicting each other. The result is a variation upon earlier   experiments. Notwithstanding the risk attendant upon that   venture, the drama is sustained by the author’s rare mastery of   scenic treatment, while in the spokesman of religion, a Catholic   priest, O’Neill has created one of his most lifelike characters.   Whether that circumstance may be interpreted as indicating a   decisive change in his outlook upon life remains to be seen in   the future.
O’Neill’s dramatic production has been extraordinarily   comprehensive in scope, versatile in character, and abundantly   fruitful in new departures; and still its originator is at a   stage of vigorous development. Yet in essential matters, he   himself has always been the same in the exuberant end   unrestrainably lively play of his imagination, in his   never-wearying delight in giving shape to the ideas, whether   emanating from within or without, that have jostled one another   in the depths of his contemplative nature, and, perhaps first and   foremost, in his possession of a proudly and ruggedly independent   character.
In choosing Eugene O’Neill as the recipient of the 1936 Nobel   Prize in Literature, the Swedish Academy can express its   appreciation of his peculiar and rare literary gifts and also   express their homage to his personality in these words: the Prize   has been awarded to him for dramatic works of vital energy,   sincerity, and intensity of feeling, stamped with an original   conception of tragedy.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
