Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1937
Nobel Prize in Literature 1937
Roger Martin du Gard
- Roger Martin du Gard
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1937
The recipient of the Nobel Prize in   Literature for 1937, Roger Martin du Gard, has dedicated most of   his activity to a single work, a long series of novels with the   collective title,
Les Thibault
(1922-40). It is a vast   work both in the number of its volumes and in its scope. It   represents modern French life by means of a whole gallery of   characters and an analysis of the intellectual currents and the   problems that occupied France during the ten years preceding the   First World War, a gallery as full and an analysis as complete as   the subject of the novel permitted. The work has therefore taken   a form especially characteristic of our era, called the   «roman fleuve» in the country of its origin.
The term designates a narrative method that is relatively little   concerned with composition and advances like a river across vast   countries, reflecting everything that is found on its way. The   essence of such a novel, in large as well as small matters,   consists in the exactitude of this reflection rather than in the   harmonious balance of its parts; it has no shape. The river   lingers at will and only rarely does the undercurrent disturb the   smooth flow of its surface.
Our age can hardly be called calm; on the contrary, the speed of   the machines accelerates the rhythm of life to the point of   agitation. It is strange, therefore, that in such an age the most   popular literary form, the novel, should have developed in a   totally opposite direction, and by so doing have become only the   more popular. Still, if the novel offered us the satisfying world   of fantasy, one could explain this phenomenon in psychological   terms as a sort of poetic compensation for the frustrations of   daily life. But it is precisely the heart-rending anguish of   reality that the novel takes such time to sound and to   emphasize.
Nevertheless, the novel is there, with its boundless substance,   and the reader finds a certain solace in the heightened awareness   which he acquires from the inevitable element of tragedy inherent   in all life. With a kind of heroism, it swallows reality in large   draughts and encourages us to bear even great sufferings with   joy. The reader’s aesthetic demands will be satisfied in isolated   sections of the work which are more condensed and therefore   better suited to call forth his feelings.
Les Thibault
does not lack such sections.
The essential characters of the novel are three members of the   same family: the father and two sons. The father remains in the   background; his passive role, one of weight and massiveness, is   presented by a special technique. The two sons and the countless   secondary characters of the work are presented in a dramatic   manner. Unprepared by anything in the story, we see them before   us, acting and speaking in the present; and we are given a   detailed and complete description of the setting. The reader must   be quick to grasp what he sees and hears, for the capricious and   irregular rhythm of life beats everywhere. He is helped in his   task by the writer’s most perfected tool: the analysis of his   heroes’ thoughts, expressed beyond words, an insight into the   darkness which engenders conscious actions. Martin du Gard goes   even further; he shows how thoughts, feelings, and the will can   be transformed before becoming words and acts. Sometimes exterior   considerations – habit, vanity, or even a simple gaucherie –   alter expressions and personality. This examination, at once   subtle and bold, of the dynamic processes of the soul obviously   constitutes Martin du Gard’s most original and most remarkable   contribution to the art of characterizing human beings. From the   aesthetic point of view, this is not always an advantage, for the   analysis may appear cumbersome when its results do not seem   necessary to the story.
This introspective method is used even for the father’s   character, but it is less complicated in his case. His   personality is already clear-cut and complete at the beginning of   the novel, for he belongs to the past. Events of the present no   longer affect him.
He is a member of the upper middle class, conscious of his status   and his duties, a faithful servant of the Church and a generous   benefactor of society, full of prudent advice. He really belongs   to a generation before his own, to the France of the July   Monarchy; that is why he is to come into more than one conflict   with the next generation, in particular with his sons. But this   conflict rarely reaches the verbal level, for the old man is too   convinced of his proper worth to engage in discussions. Hence the   perennial theme of the opposition of youth to age is not   specially treated here.
The representative of age appears above all in an attitude of   introspection and immutability; he relies heavily and   complacently on all that he thinks wise and just. No word can   influence him. In the isolation of his life, one might see the   whole tragedy of age if he were not himself so completely unaware   of the possibility of such a tragedy.
He is characterized rather by comic traits; profounder sentiments   are expressed only at the time of his death, in the face of his   human destiny. This expression is not direct but results from a   strictly objective, concrete description of the long martyrdom of   his agony. It is a moving description despite its minute detail.   Up to now he had been considered only from without, with the   exception of some rare instances when he had revealed what, even   in him, was hidden behind the façade he presented to the   world.
The difference between him and his oldest son receives little   emphasis. Antoine Thibault is a doctor. Entirely absorbed by his   profession, his father’s moral and ethical points of view are   entirely alien to him. Morality is replaced in him by an intense   and conscientious devotion to research and to the exercise of his   profession. Master of himself, prudent, tactful, he has not the   least desire for opposition; he has not even time to think of it.   In the novel one witnesses his rapid evolution within prescribed   limits. He is a man ambitious for the future. At first he is   occasionally a little fatuous, but he soon commands respect by   his work.
Antoine becomes a sympathetic representative of the intellectuals   of his day, full of ideas, without prejudices in his conceptions,   but as a determinist convinced of the inability of the individual   to change whatever the general course of events may be. He is not   a revolutionary.
Quite different is his brother Jacques, who is several years   younger. The latter is too close to the writer’s heart to suffer   any criticism. He is the hero of the work, and the exterior world   is examined and judged according to his ideals. His father’s   responsibility for his evolution is considerable, but actually   Jacques, by his whole nature, is destined to be a revolutionary.   When the story begins, he is a schoolboy of fourteen in a college   run by priests. Although he dislikes and neglects his studies, he   commands respect by his intelligence. The catastrophe occurs when   he discovers a friend among his schoolmates, and their affection,   at this dangerous period of adolescence, takes an exalted and   seemingly erotic form. Their feelings are betrayed by their   letters, misinterpreted (as, indeed, they are bound to be) by the   priests who intervene with disciplinary measures. The strict   surveillance and the very intrusion into his emotional private   life are an unbearable offense to Jacques. Furthermore, he has to   await his father’s rage, stirred up by this scandal. His revolt   is expressed in action. He carries along his friend in his escape   far from all yokes, those he endured and those he feared in a   hostile and harsh world. He feels that his whole being, in the   grip of romantic poetry and of more dangerous tendencies, is   irreconcilable with the real world. Seeking happiness and   freedom, the two boys leave for Africa, but their visionary   project is destroyed in Marseilles by the efforts of the police   who had been alerted.
On his return, his father, in an excess of pedagogic zeal, makes   a psychological mistake; he condemns his son to solitary   confinement in a reformatory founded by himself. The oppression   of this confinement causes Jacques’ indomitable personality to   emerge even stronger and fiercer. The account of this development   is the most moving episode in the work.
After he has been released owing to his brother’s influence,   Jacques is permitted to pursue his studies, his only consolation.   He does brilliantly and is easily accepted by the École   Normale, the supreme goal of all ambitious and talented students   and the open door to all top literary or scientific careers. But   Jacques cannot be attracted by an official career that for him is   only a void and an illusion; he soon sets out for adventure and   reality. Once more the boy escapes to Africa, but this time he   succeeds and he remains absent from the narrative for a long   time.
He is seen again when Antoine discovers his residence – in   Switzerland among the revolutionaries – and brings him back to   their father’s deathbed. He arrives too late for a   reconciliation, even if one considered a reconciliation between   these two diametrically opposed concepts of life possible. The   old man does not recognize him, but Jacques feels a deep sorrow,   for he is not one of those people who, obsessed with mankind’s   future happiness, begin by stifling every trace of humanity in   themselves.
Such is the outline of Jacques’ inner life as far as it is known.   For the rest he remains rather elusive, as before, but we notice   the author’s great appreciation of his faculties and of his   character.
We get to know him fully when the novel approaches its conclusion   and at the same time its height of epic grandeur – in the summer   of 1914 just before the world catastrophe. Jacques is in Geneva,   having left Paris soon after his father’s death in order to   escape the necessity of inheriting a fortune in a society which   he scorns. He belongs to a group of socialist and communist   reformers whose immediate mission is to halt the threat of war by   the revolt of the masses. The description of these agitators is   one of the least successful passages in the book; the overall   impression, whether intended or not, is that these men are not   worthy of their mission.
But Jacques’ stature increases in everyone’s eyes when he leaves   Geneva and returns to Paris to accomplish his mission. His   development is moral rather than intellectual; his actions have   no great results, but he saves his soul. The description of the   last days of July in Paris, with Jacques wavering between hope   and despair in this surcharged atmosphere, is a veritable
tour   de force
in Martin du Gard’s novelistic achievement. The   history of this period revives, reawakens, as far as the masses’   role is concerned. But, as almost always, the role is not   decisive. The masses are impotent, blind, and in this case even   less familiar than usual with the game of politics that causes   such tragedies. The author himself seems not to be particularly   initiated, but he is tolerant and human, and his description, as   far as it goes, is truthful.
Against the background of this bewildering anxiety there occurs a   brief but highly illuminating episode of a completely different   character. Jacques meets again a young girl with whom he had   almost fallen in love several years before, but from whom he had   run away as he had run away from everything else. This time the   true spark is kindled between them. This fatal love story is one   of the most significant episodes in the novel; it is profoundly   felt and rendered in all its pure beauty precisely because it is   restricted to the dimensions that the breathless flight of days   imposes on the story. It lasts only a short time, but that is   enough to give it a tragic and simple beauty.
When all the political illusions vanish for Jacques at the   declaration of war, he recreates for himself a new illusion, born   of his despair and of is will to sacrifice. Right at the front   lines he tries to ward off the catastrophe by appealing from an   airplane to the two opposing armies, seeking to inspire in them a   common revolt and a desire to overthrow the powers which hold   them captive. Without hesitating he leaves Paris and the woman he   loves.
The adventure is stamped with the same schoolboy romanticism and   lack of reality as was his first flight out of the world, but   Jacques nonetheless carries out his plan with his customary   energy. His call for revolution is printed in Switzerland, the   airplane and pilot are ready, the expedition begins. It will not   last long, for he has hardly flown over the battlefield when the   plane crashes and catches fire with its whole load, men and   bundles of paper. Jacques himself falls, a heap of bruised and   burned flesh, among the retreating French troops. All his   perception is restricted to a vague sensation of the bitterness   of defeat and to unbearable and infinite physical torments, which   are finally relieved by the bullet of a compatriot tired of   dragging along this ill-fated person whom he holds to be a spy   anyhow.
It is difficult to imagine a bitterer dénouement to a   tragedy or a crueller irony in a defeat. But Martin du Gard did   not direct his irony toward his hero. Perhaps he wanted to show   the brutality and the cruelty of world events as opposed to   idealistic tendencies. His bitterness is certainly justified   here, but the long detailed description of the whole episode   becomes almost intolerable in its scrupulous exactitude.
Jacques Thibault, as we finally get to know him, lives in our   memory as a heroic figure. Without the least grandiloquent   attitude or word, this upright, silent, and reserved man receives   at last the seal of grandeur: grandeur of will and courage.   Whenever the novel centres on him, the writer’s untiring work   achieves persuasive eloquence. After his pointed and sceptical   analysis of the human soul, which almost consumes its object with   its often extreme exactness in detail, through the most minute   realism possible, Martin du Gard finally pays homage to the   idealism of the human spirit.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
