Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1938
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 1938
Nobel Prize in Literature 1938
Pearl Buck
- Pearl Buck
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1938
Pearl Buck once told how she had found her   mission as interpreter to the West of the nature and being of   China. She did not turn to it as a literary speciality at all; it   came to her naturally.
«It is people that have always afforded me my greatest   pleasure and interest», she said, «and as I live among   the Chinese, it has been the Chinese people. When I am asked what   sort of people they are, I cannot answer. They are not this or   that, they are just people. I can no more define them than I can   define my own relatives and kinsmen. I am too near to them and I   have lived too intimately with them for that.»
She has been among the people of China in all their vicissitudes,   in good years and in famine years, in the bloody tumults of   revolutions and in the delirium of Utopias. She has associated   with the educated classes and with primordially primitive   peasants, who had hardly seen a Western face before they saw   hers. Often she has been in deadly peril, a stranger who never   thought of herself as a stranger; on the whole, her outlook   retained its profound and warm humanity. With pure objectivity   she has breathed life into her knowledge and given us the peasant   epic which has made her world-famous,
The Good Earth
(1931).
As her hero she took a man who led the same existence as his   forefathers had during countless centuries, and who possessed the   same primitive soul. His virtues spring from one single root:   affinity with the earth, which yields its crops in return for a   man’s labours.
Wang Lung is created from the same stuff as the yellow-brown   earth in the fields, and with a kind of pious joy he bestows upon   it every ounce of his energy. The two belong to each other in   origin, and they will become one again with the death he will   meet with tranquility. His work is also a duty done, and thus his   conscience is at rest. Since dishonesty avails nothing in his   pursuits, he has become honest. This is the sum total of his   moral conceptions, and equally few are his religious ones, which   are almost entirely comprehended in the cult of   ancestor-worship.
He knows that man’s life is a gleam of light between two   darknesses; from the one behind him runs the chain of forefathers   from father to son, and the chain must not be broken by him, if   he is not to lose his dim hope of survival in a surmised, unknown   region. For then would expire a spark of the life-fire of the   race, which each individual man has to care for.
And thus the story begins with Wang Lung’s marriage and his   dreams of sons in the house. Of his wife, O’Lan, he does not   dream, for – as is proper and fitting – he has never seen her.   She is a slave at the great house in the neighbouring town and   cheap to buy, since she is said to be ugly. For that reason she   has probably been left alone by the young sons of the house, and   to this the bridegroom attaches great value.
Their life together is happy, for the wife proves to be an   excellent helpmate, and the children soon make their appearance.   She satisfies all the demands laid upon her, and she has no   claims of her own. Behind her mute eyes is hidden a mute soul.   She is all submission, but wise and prompt in action; a wife also   in her paucity of words, springing from a philosophy of life   learned in a hard school.
Success attends the two. They are able to set aside a little   money, and Wang Lung’s great passion, next to parenthood, his   longing for more ground to cultivate, may now venture forth from   subconsciousness. He is able to buy more fields, and everything   promises happiness and increase.
Then comes a blow from the hand of fate; a drought descends upon   the district. The good earth is changed into yellow, whirling   dust. By selling land they could avert starvation, but that would   be to bolt and lock the door to the future. Neither of them   wishes to do that, so they set forth in company with the growing   army of beggars to a city in the south, to live on the crumbs   from the rich man’s table.
O’Lan had made the journey once before in her childhood, when the   end of it was that she was sold to save her parents and   brothers.
Thanks to her experience, they accommodate themselves to the new   life. Wang Lung toils as a beast of burden and the others beg   with an acquired aptitude. Autumn and winter pass. With the   spring, their yearning for their own land and its tilling becomes   unendurable, but they have no money for the journey.
Then again fate intervenes – as natural a fate in China as   drought and plague and flood. War, which is ever present   somewhere in that great country, and the ways of which are as   inscrutable as those of the powers of the air, stalks across the   city and makes chaos of law and order. The poor plunder the homes   of the rich.
Wang Lung goes with the mob without any definite motives, for his   peasant soul revolts at deeds of violence, but by pure chance a   handful of gold coins is almost forced into his hand. Now he can   go home and begin the spring work on his rain-soaked soil. More   than that, he can buy new fields; he is rich and happy.
He becomes still richer, though ultimately not happier, through   the plunder acquired by O’Lan. From her days of slavery she knows   something about hiding places in palaces, and she discovers a   handful of precious stones. She takes them nearly as   unpremeditatedly as a magpie steals glittering things, and hides   them as instinctively. When her husband discovers them in her   bosom, his whole world is transformed. He buys farm after farm.   He becomes the leading man in the district, no longer peasant but   lord, and his character changes colour. Simplicity and harmony   with the earth vanish. In their place comes, slowly but surely, a   curse for the desertion.
Wang Lung no longer has any real peace in his lordly leisure,   with a young concubine in the house and O’Lan pushed into a dark   corner, to die there when she has worn herself out.
The sons are not attractive figures. The eldest devotes himself   to an empty life of indulgence, the second is swallowed up by   greed for gold as a merchant and usurer. The youngest becomes one   of the «war lords» who drain the unhappy country.   Around them the Middle Empire is torn asunder in the tumult of   new creation, which has become so agonizing in our days.
The trilogy does not carry us so far, however; it concludes with   a sort of reconciliation between the third generation and the   good earth. One of Wang Lung’s grandsons, a man educated in the   West, returns to the family estate and applies the knowledge he   has acquired to the improvement of the conditions of work and   life among the peasants.
The rest of the family live without roots in that conflict   between old and new which Pearl Buck has described in other works   – mostly in the tone of tragedy.
Of the many problems in this novel, the most serious and sombre   one is the position of the Chinese woman. From the very beginning   it is on this point that the writer’s pathos emerges most   strongly, and amid the calm of the epic work it constantly makes   itself felt. An early episode in the work gives the most poignant   expression of what a Chinese woman has been worth since time   immemorial. It is given with impressive emphasis, and also with a   touch of humour which is naturally rare in this book. In a moment   of happiness, with his little first-born son dressed in fine   clothes on his arm, and seeing the future bright before him, Wang   Lung is on the point of breaking into boastful words but   restrains himself in sudden terror. There, under the open sky, he   had almost challenged the invisible spirits and drawn their evil   glances upon himself He tries to avert the menace by hiding his   son under his coat and saying in a loud voice,«What a pity   that our child is a girl, which no one wants, and is pitted with   smallpox into the bargain! Let us pray that it may die!» And   O’Lan joins in the comedy and acquiesces – probably without   thinking at all.
In reality the spirits need not waste their glances on a girl   child. Its lot is hard enough in any case. It is Pearl Buck’s   female characters which make the strongest impression. There is   O’Lan with her scanty words, which carry all the more weight. Her   whole life is portrayed in equally scanty but telling   lines.
Quite a different figure is the chief character in the novel
The Mother
(1934). She is not referred to by any other   designation, as if to indicate that her whole destiny is   expressed in that word. She is, however, vividly individualized,   a brave, energetic, strong character, of a more modern type than   O’Lan’s, perhaps, and without her slave temperament. The husband   soon deserts his home, but she keeps it together for her   children. The whole story ends in sorrow, but not in defeat. The   mother cannot be crushed, not even when her younger son is   beheaded as a revolutionary, and she has to seek a stranger’s   grave to weep by, for he has none. Just then a grandson is born,   and she again has someone to love and sacrifice herself   for.
The mother is the most finished of Pearl Buck’s Chinese female   figures, and the book is one of her best. But in character   descriptions and the storyteller’s art she is at her best in the   two biographies of her parents,
The Exile
(1936) and
Fighting Angel
(1936). These should be called classics in   the fullest sense of the word; they will endure, for they are   full of life. In this respect the models from which the portraits   are drawn are of great significance.
One seldom feels any great sense of gratitude for the company   proffered in contemporary novels, and it is gladly forgotten. The   characters have no great wealth of qualities, and the writer puts   forth all his powers to lessen them, often by a persistent   analysis with foregone results.
Here, however, one encounters two consummate characters, living   unselfish lives of action, free from brooding and vacillation.   They are profoundly unlike each other, and the fact that they are   thrown together in a common struggle in a hard and strange world   often leads to great tragedy-but not to defeat: they stand erect   even to the very last. There is a spirit of heroism in both   stories.
The mother, Carie, is richly gifted, brave and warm, of a genuine   nature, harmonious amid ever-straining forces. She is tested to   the utmost in sorrows and dangers; she loses many children   because of the harshness of the conditions of life, and at times   a terrible death threatens her in those troubled times. It is   almost as hard for her to witness the never-ending suffering   around her. She does what she can to mitigate it, and that is not   a little, but no power is sufficient for such a task.
Even inwardly she passes through a hard and unceasing struggle.   In her calling, and with her nature, she needs more than the   conviction of faith. It is not enough for her that she has   dedicated herself to God; she must also feel that the sacrifice   has been accepted. But the sign of this, for which she begs and   prays, never comes. She is compelled to persist in an untiring   endeavour to find God and to content herself with trying to be   good without divine help.
However, she preserves her spiritual health, her love for the   life which has shown her so much that is terrible, and her eye   for the beauty the world has to offer; she even retains her   happiness and her humour. She resembles a fresh fountain   springing from the heart of life.
The daughter tells her story with rare and lively perspicuity.   The biography is precise in regard to the course of events, but   creative imagination plays its part in the various episodes and   in the description of the inner life of the character. Nothing is   falsified, for this imagination is intuitive and true.
The language has vivid spontaneity; it is clear and suffused with   a tender and soulful humour. There is, however, a flaw in the   story. The daughter’s devotion to her mother makes it impossible   for her to do justice to her father. In his family life his   limitations were obvious, limitations sharp and at times painful.   As a preacher and soldier of Christ he was without blemish, in   many respects even a great character; but he ought to have lived   his life alone, free of the familial duties he hardly found time   to notice, duties which in any case weighed lightly with him   against his all-absorbing calling. Thus he was of little help to   his wife, and in her biography he could not be fully   understood.
This was accomplished, however, in another book, whose title is   the key to his life and being:
Fighting Angel
. Andrew did   not possess his wife’s richly composite nature; his was narrow   but deep, and as bright as a gleaming sword. He devoted every   thought to his goal of opening the way to salvation for the   heathens. Everything was insignificant compared to that. What   Carie prayed for in vain, communion with God, he possessed wholly   and unshakeably in the firm conceptions of his Biblical faith.   With this faith he walked like a conqueror, further than any   other in the immense heathen country, he endured all hardships   without noticing them, and he encountered threats and dangers in   the same manner. For the poor, blind, strange brown people he   felt tenderness and love. Among them his stern nature broke into   blossom. When he had won their souls to a confession of faith, he   did not doubt the genuineness of the confession; with the naivete   of a child, he accepted it as good. The door to God, always   denied them before, had been opened to them, and to weigh them   and judge them was now in the hands of Him who knows best. They   had been given their possibility of salvation, and for Andrew it   was urgent to give this possibility to all he could reach in that   immense country, where thousands were dying every hour. His   enthusiasm burned, and his work had something of genius in its   magnitude and depth.
He strained his forces to the utmost in never-ending action, and   the repose he allowed himself was the mystic’s abandonment to the   infinite amid ardent prayers. The whole of his life was a flame   which rose straight and high, in spite of all storms; it could   not be judged by ordinary conceptions. The daughter, whose   portrait conceals none of his repellent features, maintained pure   reverence before the nobility of the whole. One is profoundly   thankful for both these perfectly executed pictures – each in its   way so rare.
By awarding this year’s Prize to Pearl Buck for the notable works   which pave the way to a human sympathy passing over widely   separated racial boundaries and for the studies of human ideals   which are a great and living art of portraiture, the Swedish   Academy feels that it acts in harmony and accord with the aim of   Alfred Nobel’s dreams for the future.
Mrs. Walsh, I have attempted a short survey of your work, indeed   hardly necessary here, where the audience is so well acquainted   with your remarkable books.
I hope, though, that I have been able to give some idea of their   trend, toward opening a faraway and foreign world to deeper human   insight and sympathy within our Western sphere – a grand and   difficult task, requiring all your idealism and greatheartedness   to fulfil as you have done.
May I now ask you to receive from the hands of His Majesty the   King the Nobel Prize in Literature, conferred upon you by the   Swedish Academy.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
