Enhanced Page Navigation
Nobel Prize in Literature 1939 - Presentation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1939
Nobel Prize in Literature 1939 - Presentation
Nobel Prize in Literature 1939
Frans Eemil Sillanpää
Presentation
- Frans Eemil Sillanpää
Presentation
Swedish   Academy
, at its regular meeting on December 14, 1939
The diploma of a Nobel Prize has just been   given to you and you have heard the reasons which led the Swedish   Academy to accord this distinction to your literary work. These   reasons are very briefly stated on this parchment, but you have   been deprived of the many homages which would have been paid you   at the ceremony of the distribution of the Nobel Prizes.
These homages you will find equally in our company, in the   simplicity characteristic of our gatherings, but with the same   warmth as that which you would have received in the festival room   on the day of the ceremony. None of us knows your Finnish   language; we have been able to appreciate your works only in the   translations, but no doubt exists about your mastery as a writer.   This mastery is so great that it appears clearly even in a   foreign attire. Simple, brief, objective, without the least   affectation, your language flows with the clarity of a spring and   reflects what your artist’s eye has seized. You have chosen your   motifs with the greatest delicacy and, one could almost say, with   a sort of timidity before what is immediately beautiful. You wish   to create beauty from what exists in everyday nature, and the   manner in which you can do it often remains your secret. It is   not at the writer’s desk that one sees you work but before the   easel of the watercolourist, and, over your shoulder, one often   accustoms one’s eye to see in a new manner. Sometimes, when   painting spaces and clouds in the light of a summer day, you   forget the fear that you have of a too favourable motif and you   then employ the musical art with the hand of a master. This   characteristic trait, your fondness for the simple and the   typical, you show also in your description of man. This   description takes pleasure in rendering the everyday life of the   peasants, strongly attached to the earth from which it draws its   strength. When it is a question of deeds, you show an equal   mastery, and the effect is produced only with the simplest   means.
Concerning your most celebrated work, you have said some words   which no one else could have found: «Everything that touches   Silja is generally of a magnificent insignificance.» No   artist can go farther in the desire to remain respectfully   faithful to the reality of things. Thus you have represented your   people, without the least finery.
At the present moment, even the name of your country is   significant everywhere. As simple as you see them, your people   find themselves a prey to fateful powers, heroically great in   their indomitable courage, faithful to their duty to the very   end, to the death which they confront without trembling. In our   thanks for what you have given, our thoughts go still further;   they go, with all our admiration and the emotion which grips us,   to your people, to your nation.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
