Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1944
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1944 - Presentation
Nobel Prize in Literature 1944
Johannes V. Jensen
Presentation
- Johannes V. Jensen
Presentation
Swedish Academy
, December 10, 1945
Today Johannes V. Jensen will receive in   person the Nobel Prize in Literature for 1944, and we are happy   to salute the great Danish writer who since the beginning of the   century has been in the front rank, always active, for a long   time controversial, but universally admired for his vitality.   This child of the dry and windy moors of Jutland has, almost out   of spite, astonished his contemporaries by a remarkably prolific   production. He could well be considered one of the most fertile   Scandinavian writers. He has constructed a vast and imposing   literary
œuvre
, comprising the most diverse genres:   epic and lyric, imaginative and realistic works, as well as   historical and philosophical essays, not to mention his   scientific excursions in all directions.
This bold iconoclast and stylistic innovator has increasingly   become a patriarchal classic, and in his heart he feels close to   the poetry of the golden age and hopes that one day he will be   counted among the life-giving tutelary spirits of his   nation.
Johannes V. Jensen has been such a passionate student of   biological and philosophical evolution that he should be amazed   at the singular course of his own development. A conquering   instinct forms the basis of his being. He was a native of   Himmerland, a relatively dry region in western Jutland, and his   impressions of men and things were engraved indelibly on his   consciousness. Later he was to remember those resources that were   hidden beneath the sensations of childhood, the ancient treasure   of family memories. His father, the veterinarian of Farsö,   came from that area, and through his paternal grandfather, the   old weaver of Guldager, Jensen is directly descended from   peasants. Characteristically enough, his first book dealt with   the province of his origin. His incomparable
Himmerlandshistorier
offer an original portrait gallery of   primitive and half-savage creatures who are still subject to   ancient fears. The promised land of his childhood, powerful and   alive with the past, is found again in his mature poetry.
The first books of Johannes V. Jensen reveal him as a young man   from the provinces; a student of opposition, living in   Copenhagen; an arduous and agitated youth, fighting passionately   against intellectual banality and narrow-mindedness. This native   of Jutland, self-conscious, difficult to approach, but sensitive,   was soon to find his country too narrow. Stifled by the familiar   climate of the Danish isles, he threw himself into exotic   romanticism with the cool passion of a gambler. His travels   across foreign continents for the first time opened to him the   space needed by his restless, unchained imagination. During that   period of his life he sang the praise of technology and   mechanization. Just as his compatriot H. C. Andersen was perhaps   the first to describe the charms of railway travel, Johannes V.   Jensen was the prophet of the marvels of our age, of skyscrapers,   motor cars, and cinemas, which he never tires of praising in his   American novels,
Madame D’Ora
(1904) and
Hjulet
(1905) [The Wheel]. But soon he entered into a new stage of his   development; at the risk of simplifying matters we might say   that, having satisfied his passion for distant travel, he began   to look in time for what he had pursued in space. The same man   who had sung the modern life, with its rapid pace and noisy   machines, has become the spectator of ancient epochs and has   devoted himself to the study of the long, slow periods during   which man first sought adventure.
Thus we come to perhaps his most important creation, the six   volumes combined under the title
Den lange rejse
, which   leads us from the ice age to Christopher Columbus. The central   theme or one of the central themes of this work is the universal   mission of the Scandinavian people, from the great migrations and   the Norman invasion to the discovery of America. Jensen considers   Christopher Columbus a descendant of the Lombards, in short a   Nordic man, if not a Jutlander like himself. In this monumental   series appears a legendary figure, Nornagestr. He is not at all   the same person who appears at the court of King Olaf Tryggvason   to tell his stories and die there. According to the Icelandic   saga he was three hundred years old; but Jensen makes him even   older and turns him into a kind of Ahasverus, ubiquitous, always   behind his time, a stranger among the new generations, but   nevertheless younger than they because he lived at a time when   existence itself was young and mankind closer to its origins. The   writer has followed tradition only as far as it was useful to   him. Three prophetesses came to Nornagestr’s mother to see the   child and one of them predicted that he would die as soon as the   candle could no longer burn. Gro, the mother, immediately   extinguished the candle and gave it to the child as an amulet. In   the work of Johannes V. Jensen, Nornagestr sometimes lights it in   foreign lands and whenever he does so a deep abyss of time opens   before him. When he comes to again, seized by the love of life,   he is transported to his country, the fresh and green   Zealand.
All legends exist because reason alone cannot clarify experience.   What then is Nornagestr, who plays such an important role in the   epic of the Danish master? Perhaps it is the spirit of the Nordic   people rising from the night like a phantom or like an atavistic   creature. One suspects that this unique globetrotter with his   harp is closely related to the author himself, who has given him   many ideas about life and death, and about the close relation   between the present and eternity – the precious fruits of   experiences gathered from the lands and seas of the globe.
For Johannes V. Jensen, who grew up on a Jutland moor where the   horizon is often indented by a line of tumuli, it was natural to   divide his interests between facts and myths and to seek his way   between the shadows of the past and the realities of the present.   His example reveals to us both the attraction of the primitive   for a sensitive man and the necessity of transforming brute force   into tenderness. He has attained the summit of his art by means   of these violent contrasts. A fresh, salty breeze blows through   his work, which unfolds with vivid language, powerful expression,   and singular energy. Precisely in the poets most deeply rooted in   their country do we find this poetic genius for words. Jensen is   the voice of Jutland and of Denmark. With his talents he deserves   the title of the most eminent narrator of the victorious struggle   of the Nordic people against nature, and of the continuity of the   Nordic spirit throughout the ages.
Mr. Jensen – If you have listened to what I have just said you   will certainly think that the few moments I had were much too   short to accomplish the long voyage through your work, and that I   have neglected important aspects of it. It is fortunate for us as   well as for you that a proper presentation is hardly necessary at   all in your case. You are a well-known member of our great family   and as such you are now asked to receive from the hands of our   King the distinction which the Swedish Academy has awarded   you.
At the banquet, Professor A.H.T. Theorell,   Director of the Department of Biochemistry at the Nobel Institute   of Medicine, called Mr. Jensen «the splendid representative   of the proud literary tradition of our dear sister country,   Denmark».
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
