Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1945
Nobel Prize in Literature 1945
Gabriela Mistral
- Gabriela Mistral
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1945
One day a mother’s tears caused a whole   language, disdained at that time in good society, to rediscover   its nobility and gain glory through the power of its poetry. It   is said that when
[Frédéric] Mistral
, the first   of the two poets bearing the name of the Mediterranean wind, had   written his first verses in French as a young student, his mother   began to shed inexhaustible tears. An ignorant country woman from   Languedoc, she did not understand this distinguished language.   Mistral then wrote
Mirèio
, recounting the love of the   pretty little peasant for the poor artisan, an epic that exudes   the perfume of the flowering land and ends in cruel death. Thus   the old language of the troubadours became again the language of   poetry. The Nobel Prize of 1904 drew the world’s attention to   this event. Ten years later the poet of
Mirèio
died.
In that same year, 1914, the year in which the First World War   broke out, a new Mistral appeared at the other end of the world.   At the Floral Games of Santiago de Chile, Gabriela Mistral   obtained the prize with some poems dedicated to a dead man.
Her story is so well known to the people of South America that,   passed on from country to country, it has become almost a legend.   And now that she as at last come to us, over the crests of the   Cordilleran Andes and across the immensities of the Atlantic, we   may retell it once again.
In a small village in the Elquis valley, several decades ago, was   born a future schoolteacher named Lucila Godoy y Alcayaga. Godoy   was her father’s name, Alcayaga her mother’s; both were of Basque   origin. Her father, who had been a schoolteacher, improvised   verses with ease. His talent seems to have been mixed with the   anxiety and the instability common to poets. He left his family   when his daughter, for whom he had made a small garden, was still   a child. Her beautiful mother, who was to live a long time, has   said that sometimes she discovered her lonely little daughter   engaged in intimate conversations with the birds and the flowers   of the garden. According to one version of the legend, she was   expelled from school. Apparently she was considered too stupid   for teaching hours to be wasted on her. Yet she taught herself by   her own methods, educating herself to the extent that she became   a teacher in the small village school of Cantera. There her   destiny was fulfilled at the age of twenty, when a passionate   love arose between her and a railroad employee.
We know little of their story. We know only that he betrayed her.   One day in November, 1909, he fatally shot himself in the head.   The young girl was seized with boundless despair. Like Job, she   lifted her cry to the Heaven that had allowed this. From the lost   valley in the barren, scorched mountains of Chile a voice arose,   and far around men heard it. A banal tragedy of everyday life   lost its private character and entered into universal literature.   Lucila Godoy y Alcayaga became Gabriela Mistral. The little   provincial schoolteacher, the young colleague of
Selma Lagerlöf
of Mårbacka,   was to become the spiritual queen of Latin America.
When the poems written in memory of the dead man had made known   the name of the new poet, the sombre and passionate poems of   Gabriela Mistral began to spread over all South America. It was   not until 1922, however, that she had her large collection of   poems,
Desolación
(Despair), printed in New York. A   mother’s tears burst forth in the middle of the book, in the   fifteenth poem, tears shed for the son of the dead man, a son who   would never be born…
Gabriela Mistral transferred her natural love to the children she   taught. For them she wrote the collections of simple songs and   rounds, collected in Madrid in 1924 under the title
Ternura
(Tenderness). In her honour, four thousand Mexican   children at one time sang these rounds. Gabriela Mistral became   the poet of motherhood by adoption.
In 1938 her third large collection,
Tala
(a title which   can be translated as «ravage» but which is also the   name of a children’s game), appeared in Buenos Aires for the   benefit of the infant victims of the Spanish Civil War.   Contrasting with the pathos of
Desolación
,
Tala
expresses the cosmic calm which envelopes the South   American land whose fragrance comes all the way to us. We are   again in the garden of her childhood; I listen again to the   intimate dialogues with nature and common things. There is a   curious mixture of sacred hymn and naive song for children; the   poems on bread and wine, salt, corn, and water – water that can   be offered to thirsty men – celebrate the primordial foods of   human life!…
From her maternal hand this poet gives us a drink which tastes of   the earth and which appease the thirst of the heart. It is drawn   from the spring which ran for Sappho on a Greek island and for   Gabriela Mistral in the valley Elquis, the spring of poetry that   will never dry up.
Madame Gabriela Mistral – You have indeed made a long voyage to   be received by so short a speech. In the space of a few minutes I   have described to the compatriots of Selma Lagerlöf your   remarkable pilgrimage from the chair of a schoolmistress to the   throne of poetry. In rendering homage to the rich Latin American   literature, we address ourselves today quite specially to its   queen, the poet of
Desolación
, who has become the   great singer of sorrow and of motherhood.
I ask you now to receive from the hands of His Majesty the King   the Nobel Prize in Literature, which the Swedish Academy has   awarded you.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
