Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1946
Nobel Prize in Literature 1946
Hermann Hesse
- Hermann Hesse
Swedish Academy
This year’s Nobel Prize in literature has   been awarded to a writer of German origin who has had wide   critical acclaim and who has created his work regardless of   public favour. The sixty-nine-year-old Hermann Hesse can look   back on a considerable achievement consisting of novels, short   stories, and poems, partly available in Swedish   translation.
He escaped from political pressure earlier than other German   writers and, during the First World War, settled in Switzerland   where he acquired citizenship in 1923. It should not be   overlooked, however, that his extraction as well as his personal   connections had always justified Hesse in considering himself as   much Swiss as German. His asylum in a country that was neutral   during the war allowed him to continue his important literary   work in relative quiet, and at present Hesse, together with
Mann
, is the best representative   of the German cultural heritage in contemporary literature.
With Hesse, more than with most writers, one has to know his   personal background to understand the rather surprising   components that make up his personality. He comes from a strictly   pietist Swabian family. His father was a well-known church   historian, his mother the daughter of a missionary. She was of   French descent and was educated in India. It was taken for   granted that Hermann would become a minister, and he was sent to   the seminary at the cloister of Maulbronn. He ran away, became an   apprentice to a watchmaker, and later worked in bookshops in   Tübingen and Basle.
The youthful rebellion against the inherited piety that   nonetheless always remained in the depth of his being, was   repeated in a painful inner crisis, when in 1914 as a mature man   and an acknowledged master of regional literature he went new   ways which were far removed from his previous idyllic paths.   There are, briefly, two factors that caused this profound change   in Hesse’s writings.
The first was, of course, the World War. When at its beginning he   wanted to speak some words of peace and contemplation to his   agitated colleagues and in his pamphlet used Beethoven’s motto,   «O Freunde, nicht diese Töne», he aroused a storm   of protest. He was savagely attacked by the German press and was   apparently deeply shocked by this experience. He took it as   evidence that the entire civilization of Europe in which he had   so long believed was sick and decaying. Redemption had to come   from beyond the accepted norms, perhaps from the light of the   East, perhaps from the core hidden in anarchic theories of the   resolution of good and evil in a higher unity. Sick and   doubt-ridden, he sought a cure in the psychoanalysis of Freud,   eagerly preached and practised at that time, which left lasting   traces in Hesse’s increasingly bold books of this period.
This personal crisis found its magnificent expression in the   fantastical novel
Der Steppenwolf
(1927)   [
Steppenwolf
], an inspired account of the split in human   nature, the tension between desire and reason in an individual   who is outside the social and moral notions of everyday life. In   this bizarre fable of a man without a home, hunted like a wolf,   plagued by neuroses, Hesse created an incomparable and explosive   book, dangerous and fateful perhaps, but at the same time   liberating by its mixture of sardonic humour and poetry in the   treatment of the theme. Despite the prominence of modern problems   Hesse even here preserves a continuity with the best German   traditions; the writer whom this extremely suggestive story   recalls most is E.T.A. Hoffmann, the master of the
Elixiere   des Teufels
.
Hesse’s maternal grandfather was the famous Indologist Gundert.   Thus even in his childhood the writer felt drawn to Indian   wisdom. When as a mature man he travelled to the country of his   desire he did not, indeed, solve the riddle of life; but the   influence of Buddhism soon entered his thought, an influence by   no means restricted to
Siddhartha
(1922) the beautiful   story of a young Brahman’s search for the meaning of life on   earth.
Hesse’s work combines so many influences from Buddha and St.   Francis to Nietzsche and Dostoevsky that one might suspect that   he is primarily an eclectic experimenter with different   philosophies. But this opinion would be quite wrong. His   sincerity and his seriousness are the foundations of his work and   remain in control even in his treatment of the most extravagant   subjects.
In his most accomplished novellas we are confronted both directly   and indirectly with his personality. His style, always admirable,   is as perfect in rebellion and demonic ecstasy as in calm   philosophical speculation. The story of the desperate embezzler   Klein, who flees to Italy to seek there his last chance, and the   marvellously calm description of his late brother Hans in the
Gedenkblätter
(1937) [Reminiscences] are masterly   examples from different fields of creativity.
In Hesse’s more recent work the vast novel
Das   Glasperlenspiel
(1943) [
Magister Ludi
] occupies a   special position. It is a fantasy about a mysterious intellectual   order, on the same heroic and ascetic level as that of the   Jesuits, based on the exercise of meditation as a kind of   therapy. The novel has an imperious structure in which the   concept of the game and its role in civilization has surprising   parallels with the ingenious study
Homo ludens
by the   Dutch scholar Huizinga. Hesse’s attitude is ambiguous. In a   period of collapse it is a precious task to preserve the cultural   tradition. But civilization cannot be permanently kept alive by   turning it into a cult for the few. If it is possible to reduce   the variety of knowledge to an abstract system of formulas, we   have on the one hand proof that civilization rests on an organic   system; on the other, this high knowledge cannot be considered   permanent. It is as fragile and destructible as the glass pearls   themselves, and the child that finds the glittering pearls in the   rubble no longer knows their meaning. A philosophical novel of   this kind easily runs the risk of being called recondite, but   Hesse defended his with a few gentle lines in the motto of the   book, «…then in certain cases and for irresponsible men it   may be that non-existent things can be described more easily and   with less responsibility in words than the existent, and   therefore the reverse applies for pious and scholarly historians;   for nothing destroys description so much as words, and yet there   is nothing more necessary than to place before the eyes of men   certain things the existence of which is neither provable nor   probable, but which, for this very reason, pious and scholarly   men treat to a certain extent as existent in order that they may   be led a step further toward their being and their   becoming.»
If Hesse’s reputation as a prose writer varies, there has never   been any doubt about his stature as a poet. Since the death of   Rilke and George he has been the foremost German poet of our   time. He combines exquisite purity of style with moving emotional   warmth, and his musical form is unsurpassed in our time. He   continues the tradition of Goethe, Eichendorf, and Mörike   and renews its poetic magic by a colour peculiar to himself. His   collection of poems,
Trost der Nacht
(1929) [The Solace of   Night], mirrors with unusual clarity not only his inner drama,   his healthy and sick hours, and his intense self-examination, but   also his devotion to life, his pleasure in painting, and his   worship of nature. A later collection,
Neue Gedichte
(1937) [New Poems], is full of autumnal wisdom and melancholy   experience, and it shows a heightened sensibility in image, mood,   and melody.
In a summary introduction it is impossible to do justice to the   many changing qualities which make this writer particularly   attractive to us and which have justly given him a faithful   following. He is a problematic and a confessional poet with the   wealth of the South German mind, which he expresses in a very   individual mixture of freedom and piety. If one overlooked the   passionate tendency to protest, the ever-burning fire that makes   the dreamer a fighter as soon as the matters at stake are sacred   to him, one might call him a romantic poet. In one passage Hesse   says that one must never be content with reality, that one should   neither adore nor worship it, for this low, always disappointing,   and desolate reality cannot be changed except by denying it   through proving our superior strength.
Hesse’s award is more than the confirmation of his fame. It   honours a poetic achievement which presents throughout the image   of a good man in his struggle, following his calling with rare   faithfulness, who in a tragic epoch succeeded in bearing the arms   of true humanism.
Unfortunately, reasons of health have prevented the poet from   making the journey to Stockholm. In his stead the envoy of the   Swiss Federal Republic will accept the Prize.
Your Excellency, I ask you now to receive from the hands of His   Majesty the King the Prize awarded by the Swedish Academy to your   countryman, Hermann Hesse.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
