Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1947
Nobel Prize in Literature 1947
André Gide
- André Gide
Swedish Academy
On the first page of the remarkable journal   kept by André Gide for half a century, the author, then   twenty years old, finds himself on the sixth floor of a building   in the Latin Quarter, looking for a meeting place for «The   Symbolists», the group of youths to which he belonged. From   the window he looked at the Seine and Notre Dame during the   sunset of an autumn day and felt like the hero of a Balzac novel,   a Rastignac ready to conquer the city lying at his feet:«And   now, we two!» However, Gide’s ambition was to find long and   twisting paths ahead; nor was it to be contented with easy   victories.
The seventy-eight-year-old writer who this day is being honoured   with the award of the Nobel Prize has always been a controversial   figure. From the beginning of his career he put himself in the   first rank of the sowers of spiritual anxiety, but this does not   keep him today from being counted almost everywhere among the   first literary names of France, or from enjoying an influence   that has persisted unabatedly through several generations. His   first works appeared in the 1890’s; his last one dates from the   spring of 1947. A very important period in the spiritual history   of Europe is outlined in his work, constituting a kind of   dramatic foundation to his long life. One may ask why the   importance of this work has only so recently been appreciated at   its true value: the reason is that André Gide belongs   unquestionably to that class of writers whose real evaluation   requires a long perspective and a space adequate for the three   stages of the dialectic process. More than any of his   contemporaries, Gide has been a man of contrasts, a veritable   Proteus of perpetually changing attitudes, working tirelessly at   opposite poles in order to strike flashing sparks. This is why   his work gives the appearance of an uninterrupted dialogue in   which faith constantly struggles against doubt, asceticism   against the love of life, discipline against the need for   freedom. Even his external life has been mobile and changing, and   his famous voyages to the Congo in 1927 and to Soviet Russia in   1935 – to cite only those – are proof enough that he did not want   to be ranked among the peaceful stay-at-homes of   literature.
Gide comes from a Protestant family whose social position   permitted him to follow his vocation freely and to devote greater   attention than most others can afford to the cultivation of his   personality and to his inner development. He described this   family milieu in his famous autobiography whose title
Si le   grain ne meurt
(1924) [
If It Die…
] is taken from   St. John’s words about the grain of wheat that must die before   its fruition. Although he has strongly reacted against his   Puritan education, he has nonetheless all his life dwelled on the   fundamental problems of morality and religion, and at times he   has defined with rare purity the message of Christian love,   particularly in his short novel,
La Porte étroite
(1909) [
Strait Is the Gate
], which deserves to be compared   with the tragedies of Racine.
On the other hand, one finds in André Gide still stronger   manifestations of that famous «immoralism» – a   conception which his adversaries have often misinterpreted. In   reality it designates the free act, the «gratuitous»   act, the liberation from all repressions of conscience, something   analogous to what the American recluse Thoreau expressed,   «The worst thing is being the slave dealer of one’s   soul.» One should always keep in mind that Gide found some   difficulty in presenting as virtue that which is composed of the   absence of generally recognized virtues.
Les Nourritures   terrestres
(1897) [
Fruits of the Earth
] was a youthful   attempt from which he later turned away, and the diverse delights   he enthusiastically sings of evoke for us those beautiful fruits   of southern lands which do not bear keeping. The exhortation   which he addresses to his disciple and reader, «And now,   throw away my book. Leave me!», has been followed first of   all by himself in his later works. But what leaves the strongest   impression, in
Nourritures
as elsewhere, is the intense   poetry of separation, of return, captured by him in so masterly a   fashion in the flute-song of his prose. One rediscovers it often,   for example in this brief journal entry, written later, near a   mosque at Brusa on one May morning: «Ah! begin anew and on   again afresh! Feel with rapture this exquisite tenderness of the   cells in which emotion filters like milk… Bush of the dense   gardens, rose of purity, indolent rose in the shade of plane   trees, can it be thee thou hast not known my youth? Before? Is it   a memory I dwell in? Is it indeed I who am seated in this little   corner of the mosque, I who breathe and I who love thee? or do I   only dream of loving thee?… If I were indeed real, would this   swallow have stolen so close to me?»
Behind the strange and incessant shift in perspective that Gide’s   work offers to us, in the novels as well as in the essays, in the   travel diaries, or in the analyses of contemporary events, we   always find the same supple intelligence, the same incorruptible   psychology, expressed in a language which, by the most sober   means, attains a wholly classic limpidity and the most delicate   variety. Without going into the details of the work, let us   mention in this connection the celebrated
Les Faux   Monnayeurs
(1926) [
The Counterfeiters
], with its bold   and penetrating analysis of a group of young French people.   Through the novelty of its technique, this novel has inspired a   whole new orientation in the contemporary art of the narrative.   Next to it, put the volume of memoirs already mentioned, in which   the author intended to recount his life truthfully without adding   anything that could be to his advantage or hiding what would be   unpleasant. Rousseau had had the same intention, with this   difference, that Rousseau exhibits his faults in the conviction   that all men being as evil as he, none will dare to judge or   condemn him. Gide, however, quite simply refuses to admit to his   fellows the right to pass any judgment on him; he calls on a   higher tribunal, a vaster perspective, in which he will present   himself before the sovereign eye of God. The significance of   these memoirs thus is indicated in the mysterious Biblical   quotation of the grain of wheat which here represents the   personality: as long as the latter is sentient, deliberate, and   egocentric, it dwells alone and without germinating power; it is   only at the price of its death and its transmutation that it will   acquire life and be able to bear fruit. «I do not   think,» Gide writes, «that there is a way of looking at   the moral and religious question or of acting in the face of it   that I have not known and made my own at some moment in my life.   In truth, I have wished to reconcile them all, the most diverse   points of view, by excluding nothing and by being ready to   entrust to Christ the solution of the contest between Dionysus   and Apollo.»
Such a statement throws light on the intellectual versatility for   which Gide is often blamed and misunderstood, but which has never   led him to betray himself. His philosophy has a tendency toward   regeneration at any price and does not fail to evoke the   miraculous phoenix which out of its nest of flames hurls itself   to a new flight.
In circumstances like those of today, in which, filled with   admiring gratitude, we linger before the rich motifs and the   essential themes of this work, it is natural that we pass over   the critical reservations which the author himself seems to enjoy   provoking. For even in his ripe age, Gide has never argued in   favor of a full and complete acceptance of his experiences and   his conclusions. What he wishes above all is to stir up and   present the problems. Even in the future, his influence will   doubtless be noted less in a total acceptance than in a lively   controversy about his work. And in this lies the foundation of   his true greatness.
His work contains pages which provoke like a defiance through the   almost unequalled audacity of the confession. He wishes to combat   the Pharisees, but it is difficult, in the struggle, to avoid   shocking certain rather delicate norms of human character. One   must always remember that this manner of acting is a form of the   impassioned love of truth which, since Montaigne and Rousseau,   has been an axiom of French literature. Through all the phases of   his evolution, Gide has appeared as a true defender of literary   integrity, founded on the personality’s right and duty to present   all its problems resolutely and honestly. From this point of   view, his long and varied activity, stimulated in so many ways,   unquestionably represents an idealistic value.
Since Mr. André Gide, who has declared with great gratitude   his acceptance of the distinction offered him, has unfortunately   been prevented from coming here by reasons of health, his Prize   will now be handed to His Excellency the French Ambassador.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
