Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1948
Nobel Prize in Literature 1948
T.S. Eliot
- T.S. Eliot
Swedish Academy
In the impressive succession of Nobel Prize   winners in Literature, T.S. Eliot marks a departure from the type   of writer that has most frequently gained that distinction. The   majority have been representatives of a literature which seeks   its natural contacts in the public consciousness, and which, to   attain this goal, avails itself of the media lying more or less   ready at hand. This year’s Prize winner has chosen to take   another path. His career is remarkable in that, from an extremely   exclusive and consciously isolated position, he has gradually   come to exercise a very far-reaching influence. At the outset he   appeared to address himself to but a small circle of initiates,   but this circle slowly widened, without his appearing to will it   himself. Thus in Eliot’s verse and prose there was quite a   special accent, which compelled attention just in our own time, a   capacity to cut into the consciousness of our generation with the   sharpness of a diamond.
In one of his essays Eliot himself has advanced, as a purely   objective and quite uncategorical assumption, that poets in our   present civilization have to be difficult to approach. «Our   civilization», he says, «comprehends great variety and   complexity, and this variety and complexity, playing upon a   refined sensibility, must produce various and complex results.   The poet must become more and more comprehensive, more allusive,   more indirect, in order to force, to dislocate if necessary,   language into his meaning.»
Against the background of such a pronouncement, we may test his   results and learn to understand the importance of his   contribution. The effort is worth-while. Eliot first gained his   reputation as the result of his magnificent experiment in poetry,
The Waste Land
, which appeared in 1922 and then seemed   bewildering in several ways, due to its complicated symbolic   language, its mosaic-like technique, and its apparatus of erudite   allusion. It may be recalled that this work appeared in the same   year as another pioneer work, which had a still more sensational   effect on modern literature, the much discussed
Ulysses
,   from the hand of an Irishman, James Joyce. The parallel is by no   means fortuitous, for these products of the nineteen-twenties are   closely akin to one another, in both spirit and mode of   composition.
The Waste Land
– a title whose terrifying import no one   can help feeling, when the difficult and masterly word-pattern   has finally yielded up its secrets. The melancholy and sombre   rhapsody aims at describing the aridity and impotence of modern   civilization, in a series of sometimes realistic and sometimes   mythological episodes, whose perspectives impinge on each other   with an indescribable total effect. The cycle of poems consists   of 436 lines, but actually it contains more than a packed novel   of as many pages.
The Waste Land
now lies a quarter of a   century back in time, but unfortunately it has proved that its   catastrophic visions still have undiminished actuality in the   shadow of the atomic age.
Since then Eliot has passed on to a series of poetic creations of   the same brilliant concentration, in pursuance of the agonized,   salvation-seeking main theme. The
horror vacui
of modern   man in a secularized world, without order, meaning, or beauty,   here stands out with poignant sincerity. In his latest work,
Four Quartets
(1943), Eliot has arrived at a meditative   music of words, with almost liturgical refrains and fine, exact   expressions of his spiritual experiences. The transcendental   superstructure rises ever clearer in his world picture. At the   same time a manifest striving after a positive, guiding message   emerges in his dramatic art, especially in the mighty historical   play about Thomas of Canterbury,
Murder in the Cathedral
(1935), but also in
The Family Reunion
(1939), which is a   bold attempt to combine such different conceptions as the   Christian dogma of original sin and the classical Greek myths of   fate, in an entirely modern environment, with the scene laid in a   country house in northern England.
The purely poetical part of Eliot’s work is not quantitatively   great, but as it now stands out against the horizon, it rises   from the ocean like a rocky peak and indisputably forms a   landmark, sometimes assuming the mystic contours of a cathedral.   It is poetry impressed with the stamp of strict responsibility   and extraordinary self-discipline, remote from all emotional   clichés, concentrated entirely on essential things, stark,   granitic, and unadorned, but from time to time illuminated by a   sudden ray from the timeless space of miracles and   revelations.
Insight into Eliot must always present certain problems to be   overcome, obstacles which are at the same time stimulating. It   may appear to be contradictory to say that this radical pioneer   of form, the initiator of a whole revolution in style within   present-day poetry, is at the same time a coldly reasoning,   logically subtle theorist, who never wearies of defending   historical perspectives and the necessity of fixed norms for our   existence. As early as the 1940’s, he had become a convinced   supporter of the Anglican Church in religion and of classicism in   literature. In view of this philosophy of life, which implies a   consistent return to ideals standardized by age, it might seem   that his modernistic practice would dash with his traditional   theory. But this is hardly the case. Rather, in his capacity as   an author, he has uninterruptedly and with varying success worked   to bridge this chasm, the existence of which he must be fully and   perhaps painfully conscious. His earliest poetry, so convulsively   disintegrated, so studiously aggressive in its whole technical   form, can finally also be apprehended as a negative expression of   a mentality which aims at higher and purer realities and must   first free itsef of abhorrence and cynicism. In other words, his   revolt is that of the Christian poet. It should also be observed   in this connection that, on the whole, Eliot is careful not to   magnify the power of poetry in relation to that of religion. In   one place, where he wishes to point out what poetry can really   accomplish for our inner life, he does so with great caution and   reserve: «It may make us from time to time a little more   aware of the deeper, unnamed feelings which form the substratum   of our being, to which we rarely penetrate; for our lives are   mostly a constant evasion of ourselves.»
Thus, if it can be said with some justification that Eliot’s   philosophical position is based on nothing but tradition, it   ought nevertheless to be borne in mind that he constantly points   out how generally that word has been misused in today’s debates.   The word «tradition» itself implies movement, something   which cannot be static, something which is constantly handed on   and assimilated. In the poetic tradition, too, this living   principle prevails. The existing monuments of literature form an   idealistic order, but this is slightly modified every time a new   work is added to the series. Proportions and values are   unceasingly changing. Just as the old directs the new, this in   its turn directs the old, and the poet who realizes this must   also realize the scope of his difficulties and his   responsibility.
Externally, too, the now sixty-year-old Eliot has also returned   to Europe, the ancient and storm-tossed, but still venerable,   home of cultural traditions. Born an American, he comes from one   of the Puritan families who emigrated from England at the end of   the seventeenth century. His years of study as a young man at the   Sorbonne, at Marburg, and at Oxford, clearly   revealed to him that at bottom he felt akin to the historical   milieu of the Old World, and since 1927 Mr. Eliot has been a   British subject.
It is not possible in this presentation to indicate more than the   most immediate fascinating features in the complicated   multiplicity of Eliot’s characteristics as a writer. The   predominating one is the high, philosophically schooled   intelligence, which has succeeded in enlisting in its service   both imagination and learning, both sensitivity and the analysis   of ideas. His capacity for stimulating a reconsideration of   pressing questions within intellectual and aesthetic opinion is   also extraordinary, and however much the appraisement may vary,   it can never be denied that in his period he has been an eminent   poser of questions, with a masterly gift for finding the apt   wording, both in the language of poetry and in the defence of   ideas in essay form.
Nor is it due only to chance that he has written one of the   finest studies of Dante’s work and personality. In his bitter   moral pathos, in his metaphysical line of thought, and in his   burning longing for a world order inspired by religion, a
civitas dei
, Eliot has indeed certain points of contact   with the great Florentine poet. It redounds to his honour that,   amidst the varied conditions of his milieu, he can be justly   characterized as one of Dante’s latest-born successors. In his   message we hear solemn echoes from other times, but that message   does not by any means therefore become less real when it is given   to our own time and to us who are now living.
Mr. Eliot – According to the diploma, the award is made chiefly   in appreciation of your remarkable achievements as a pioneer   within modern poetry. I have here tried to give a brief survey of   this very important work of yours, which is admired by many   ardent readers in this country.
Exactly twenty-five years ago, there stood where you are now   standing another famous poet who wrote in the English tongue,
William Butler Yeats
. The honour   now passes to you as being a leader and a champion of a new   period in the long history of the world’s poetry.
With the felicitations of the Swedish Academy, I now ask you to   receive your Prize from the hands of His Royal Highness the Crown   Prince.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
