Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1949
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 1950
Nobel Prize in Literature 1949
William Faulkner
- William Faulkner
Swedish   Academy
, December 10, 1950
William Faulkner is essentially a regional   writer, and as such reminds Swedish readers now and then of two   of our own most important novelists,
Selma Lagerlöf
and Hjalmar Bergman.   Faulkner’s Värmland is the northern part of the state of   Mississippi and his Vadköping is called Jefferson. The   parallelism between him and our two fellow countrymen could be   extended and deepened, but time does not allow such excursions   now. The difference – the great difference – between him and them   is that Faulkner’s setting is so much darker and more bloody than   that against which Lagerlöf’s cavaliers and Bergman’s   bizarre figures lived. Faulkner is the great epic writer of the   southern states with all their background: a glorious past built   upon cheap Negro slave labour; a civil war and a defeat which   destroyed the economic basis necessary for the then existing   social structure; a long drawn-out and painful interim of   resentment; and, finally, an industrial and commercial future   whose mechanization and standardization of life are strange and   hostile to the Southerner and to which he has only gradually been   able and willing to adapt himself Faulkner’s novels are a   continuous and ever-deepening description of this painful   process, which he knows intimately and feels intensely, coming as   he does from a family which was forced to swallow the bitter   fruits of defeat right down to their worm-eaten cores:   impoverishment, decay, degeneration in its many varied forms. He   has been called a reactionary. But even if this term is to some   extent justified, it is balanced by the feeling of guilt which   becomes clearer and dearer in the dark fabric at which he labours   so untiringly. The price of the gentlemanly environment, the   chivalry, the courage, and the often extreme individualism was   inhumanity. Briefly, Faulkner’s dilemma might be expressed thus:   he mourns for and, as a writer, exaggerates a way of life which   he himself, with his sense of justice and humanity, would never   be able to stomach. It is this that makes his regionalism   universal. Four bloody years of war brought about the changes in   the social structure which it has taken the peoples of Europe,   except the Russians, a century and a half to undergo.
It is against a background of war and violence that the   fifty-two-year-old writer sets his more important novels. His   grandfather held a high command during the Civil War. He himself   grew up in the atmosphere created by warlike feats and by the   bitterness and the poverty resulting from the never admitted   defeat. When he was twenty he entered the Canadian Royal Air   Force, crashed twice, and returned home, not as a military   hero but as a physically and psychically war-damaged youth with   dubious prospects, who for some years faced a precarious   existence. He had joined the war because, as his
alter ego
expressed it in one of his early novels, «one doesn’t want   to waste a war». But out of the youth who once had been   thirsting for sensation and battle, there gradually developed a   man whose loathing of violence is expressed more and more   passionately and might well be summed up by the Fifth   Commandment: Thou shalt not kill. On the other hand, there are   things which man must always show himself unwilling to bear:   «Some things», says one of his latest characters,   «you must always be unable to bear. Injustice and outrage   and dishonor and shame. Not for kudos and not for cash – Just   refuse to bear them.» 0ne might ask how these two maxims can   be reconciled or how Faulkner himself envisages a reconciliation   between them in times of international lawlessness. It is a   question which he leaves open.
The fact is that, as a writer, Faulkner is no more interested in   solving problems than he is tempted to indulge in sociological   comments on the sudden changes in the economic position of the   southern states. The defeat and the consequences of defeat are   merely the soil out of which his epics grow. He is not fascinated   by men as a community but by man in the community, the individual   as a final unity in himself, curiously unmoved by external   conditions. The tragedies of these individuals have nothing in   common with Greek tragedy: they are led to their inexorable end   by passions caused by inheritance, traditions, and environment,   passions which are expressed either in a sudden outburst or in a   slow liberation from perhaps generations-old restrictions. With   almost every new work Faulkner penetrates deeper into the human   psyche, into man’s greatness and powers of self-sacrifice, lust   for power, cupidity, spiritual poverty, narrow-mindedness,   burlesque obstinacy, anguish, terror, and degenerate aberrations.   As a probing psychologist he is the unrivalled master among all   living British and American novelists. Neither do any of his   colleagues possess his fantastic imaginative powers and his   ability to create characters. His subhuman and superhuman   figures, tragic or comic in a macabre way, emerge from his mind   with a reality that few existing people – even those nearest to   us – can give us, and they move in a milieu whose odours of   subtropical plants, ladies’ perfumes, Negro sweat, and the smell   of horses and mules penetrate immediately even into a   Scandinavian’s warm and cosy den. As a painter of landscapes he   has the hunter’s intimate knowledge of his own hunting-ground,   the topographer’s accuracy, and the impressionist’s sensitivity.   Moreover – side by side with Joyce and perhaps even more so –   Faulkner is the great experimentalist among twentieth-century   novelists. Scarcely two of his novels are similar technically. It   seems as if by this continuous renewal he wanted to achieve the   increased breadth which his limited world, both in geography and   in subject matter, cannot give him. The same desire to experiment   is shown in his mastery, unrivalled among modern British and   American novelists, of the richness of the English language, a   richness derived from its different linguistic elements and the   periodic changes in style – from the spirit of the Elizabethans   down to the scanty but expressive vocabulary of the Negroes of   the southern states. Nor has anyone since Meredith – except   perhaps Joyce – succeeded in framing sentences as infinite and   powerful as Atlantic rollers. At the same time, few writers of   his own age can rival him in giving a chain of events in a series   of short sentences, each of which is like a blow of a hammer,   driving the nail into the plank up to the head and securing it   immovably. His perfect command over the resources of the language   can – and often does – lead him to pile up words and associations   which try the reader’s patience in an exciting or complicated   story. But this profusion has nothing to do with literary   flamboyance. Nor does it merely bear witness to the abounding   agility of his imagination; in all their richness, every new   attribute, every new association is intended to dig deeper into   the reality which his imaginative power conjures up.
Faulkner has often been described as a determinist. He himself,   however, has never claimed to adhere to any special philosophy of   life. Briefly, his view of life may perhaps be summed up in his   own words: that the whole thing (perhaps?) signifies nothing. If   this were not the case, He or They who set up the whole fabric   would have arranged things differently. And yet it must mean   something, because man continues to struggle and must continue to   struggle until, one day, it is all over. But Faulkner has one   belief, or rather one hope: that every man sooner or later   receives the punishment he deserves and that self-sacrifice not   only brings with it personal happiness but also adds to the sum   total of the good deeds of mankind. It is a hope, the latter part   of which reminds us of the firm conviction expressed by the   Swedish poet Viktor Rydberg in the recitative of the Cantata   presented at the Jubilee Degree Conferment at Uppsala in   1877.
Mr. Faulkner – The name of the southern state in which you were   born and reared has long been well known to us Swedes, thanks to   two of the closest and dearest friends of your boyhood, Tom   Sawyer and Huckleberry Finn. Mark Twain put the Mississippi River   on the literary map. Fifty years later you began a series of   novels with which you created out of the state of Mississippi one   of the landmarks of twentieth-century world literature; novels   which with their ever-varying form, their ever-deeper and more   intense psychological insight, and their monumental characters –   both good and evil – occupy a unique place in modern American and   British fiction.
Mr. Faulkner – It is now my privilege to ask you to receive from   the hands of His Majesty the King the Nobel Prize in Literature,   which the Swedish Academy has awarded you.
At the banquet, Robin Fåhraeus, Member   of the
Royal Academy   of Sciences
, addressed the American author: «Mr. William   Faulkner – We heard with great pleasure that you were coming to   our country to receive your Prize in person. We are indeed happy   to greet you as an eminent artist, as a detached analyst of the   human heart, as a great author who in a brilliant manner has   enlarged man’s knowledge of himself.»
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
