Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1950
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 1950
Nobel Prize in Literature 1950
Bertrand Russell
- Bertrand Russell
Presentation   Speech by Anders Österling, Permanent Secretary of   the
Swedish Academy
The great work on Western philosophy which   Bertrand Russell brought out in 1946, that is, at the age of   seventy-four, contains numerous characteristic reflections giving   us an idea of how he himself might like us to regard his long and   arduous life. In one place, speaking of the pre-Socratic   philosophers, he says, «In studying a philosopher, the right   attitude is neither reverence nor contempt, but first a kind of   hypothetical sympathy, until it is possible to know what it feels   like to believe in his theories, and only then a revival of the   critical attitude, which should resemble, as far as possible, the   state of mind of a person abandoning opinions which he has   hitherto held.»
And in another place in the same work he writes, «It is not   good either to forget the questions that philosophy asks, or to   persuade ourselves that we have found indubitable answers to   them. To teach how to live without certainty, and yet without   being paralyzed by hesitation, is perhaps the chief thing that   philosophy, in our age, can still do for those who study   it.»
With his superior intellect, Russell has, throughout half a   century, been at the centre of public debate, watchful and always   ready for battle, as active as ever to this very day, having   behind him a life of writing of most imposing scope. His works in   the sciences concerned with human knowledge and mathematical   logic are epoch-making and have been compared to Newton’s   fundamental results in mechanics. Yet it is not these   achievements in special branches of science that the Nobel Prize   is primarily meant to recognize. What is important, from our   point of view, is that Russell has so extensively addressed his   books to a public of laymen, and, in doing so, has been so   eminently successful in keeping alive the interest in general   philosophy.
His whole life’s work is a stimulating defence of the reality of   common sense. As a philosopher he pursues the line from the   classical English empiricism, from Locke and Hume. His attitude   toward the idealistic dogmas is a most independent one and quite   frequently one of opposition. The great philosophical systems   evolved on the Continent he regards, so to speak, from the   chilly, windswept, and distinctive perspective of the English   Channel. With his keen and sound good sense, his clear style, and   his wit in the midst of seriousness, he has in his work evinced   those characteristics which are found among only the elite of   authors. Time does not permit even the briefest survey of his   works in this area, which are fascinating also from a purely   literary point of view. It may suffice to mention such books as   the
History of Western Philosophy
(1946),
Human   Knowledge
(1948),
Sceptical Essays
(1948), and the   sketch «My Mental Development» (in
The Philosophy of   Bertrand Russell
, 1951); but to these should be added a great   number of equally important books on practically all the problems   which the present development of society involves.
Russell’s views and opinions have been influenced by varied   factors and cannot easily be summarized. His famous family   typifies the Whig tradition in English politics. His grandfather   was the Victorian statesman, John Russell. Familiar from an early   age with the ideas of Liberalism, he was soon confronted by the   problems of rising socialism and since then he has, as an   independent critic, weighed the advantages and disadvantages of   this form of society. He has consistently and earnestly warned us   of the dangers of the new bureaucracy. He has defended the right   of the individual against collectivism, and he views industrial   civilization as a growing threat to humanity’s chances of simple   happiness and joy in living. After his visit to the Soviet Union   in 1920 he strongly and resolutely opposed himself to Communism.   On the other hand, during a subsequent journey in China, he was   very much attracted by the calm and peaceable frame of mind of   China’s cultivated classes and recommended it as an example to a   West ravaged by wild aggression.
Much in Russell’s writings excites protest. Unlike many other   philosophers, he regards this as one of the natural and urgent   tasks of an author. Of course, his rationalism does not solve all   troublesome problems and cannot be used as a panacea, even if the   philosopher willingly writes out the prescription. Unfortunately,   there are – and obviously always will be – obscure forces which   evade intellectual analysis and refuse to submit to control.   Thus, even if Russell’s work has, from a purely practical point   of view, met with but little success in an age which has seen two   world wars – even if it may look as if, in the main, his ideas   have been bitterly repudiated – we must nevertheless admire the   unwavering valour of this rebellious teller of the truth and the   sort of dry, fiery strength and gay buoyancy with which he   presents his convictions, which are never dictated by opportunism   but are often directly unpopular. To read the philosopher Russell   often gives very much the same pleasure as to listen to the   outspoken hero in a
Shaw
comedy,   when in loud and cheerful tones he throws out his bold retorts   and keen arguments.
In conclusion, Russell’s philosophy may be said in the best sense   to fulfil just those desires and intentions that Alfred Nobel had   in mind when he instituted his Prizes. There are quite striking   similarities between their outlooks on life. Both of them are at   the same time sceptics and utopians, both take a gloomy view of   the contemporary world, yet both hold fast to a belief in the   possibility of achieving logical standards for human behaviour.   The Swedish Academy believes that it acts in the spirit of   Nobel’s intention when, on the occasion of the fiftieth   anniversary of the Foundation, it wishes to honour Bertrand   Russell as one of our time’s brilliant spokesmen of rationality   and humanity, as a fearless champion of free speech and free   thought in the West.
My lord – Exactly two hundred years ago Jean Jacques Rousseau was   awarded the prize offered by the Academy of Dijon   for his famous answer to the question of «whether the arts   and sciences have contributed to improve morals.» Rousseau   answered «No», and this answer – which may not have   been a very serious one – in any case had most serious   consequences. The Academy of Dijon had no revolutionary aims.   This is true also of the Swedish Academy, which has now chosen to   reward you for your philosophical works just because they are   undoubtedly of service to moral civilization and, in addition,   most eminently answer to the spirit of Nobel’s intentions. We   honour you as a brilliant champion of humanity and free thought,   and it is a pleasure for us to see you here on the occasion of   the fiftieth anniversary of the Nobel Foundation. With these   words I request you to receive from the hands of His Majesty the   King the Nobel Prize in Literature for 1950.
At the banquet, Robin Fåhraeus, Member   of the
Royal Academy   of Sciences
, made the following comment: «Dear Professor   Bertrand Russell – We salute you as one of the greatest and most   influential thinkers of our age, endowed with just those four   characteristics which on another occasion you have regarded to be   the criteria of prominent fellow men; namely, vitality, courage,   receptivity, and intelligence.»
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
