Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1951
Nobel Prize in Literature 1951
Pär Lagerkvist
- Pär Lagerkvist
Swedish Academy
In a youthful manifesto of 1913 entitled
Ordkonst och bildkonst
[Verbal Art and Pictorial Art],   Pär Lagerkvist, whose name was then unknown, had the   audacity to find fault with the decadence of the literature of   his time which, according to him, did not answer the requirements   of art. His essay contains declarations which in their far too   categorial form border on truism, but which in the light of his   later work take on another, more profound meaning. Thus the young   writer declared, «The writer’s mission is to explain his   time from an artist’s point of view and to express the thought   and feeling of this time for us and generations to come.»   Today we can affirm that Lagerkvist himself, as far as one can   follow him in his ascent toward maturity and greatness, amply   accomplished this goal.
Today we call attention to this Swedish writer, not to present   him in a general fashion – which would indeed seem superfluous –   but to render to his work and to his person the homage due to   them. Our attention is drawn above all to the impassioned,   unfaltering sincerity, the ardent, unwearying patience, that have   been the living forces behind his work. By these purely spiritual   qualities, Pär Lagerkvist should answer fairly well, at   least as a type of creative mind, to what Nobel said in the   Sibylline terms of his will: «in an idealistic sense».   Undeniably he belongs to that group of writers who, boldly and   directly, have dedicated themselves to the vital questions of   humanity, and who have tirelessly returned to the fundamental   problems of our existence, with all that is overwhelming and   sorrowful. The era in which he lived, whose materials determined   his vocation, was menaced by rising clouds and by the eruptions   of catastrophes. It is on this sombre and chaotic scene that he   began to fight; it is in this country without sun that he   discovered the flame of his inspiration.
Lagerkvist, with a precocious instinct of the imagination,   apprehended the approaching disaster so far in advance that he   was the prophet of anguish in Nordic literature; but he is also   one of the most vigilant guardians of the spirit’s sacred fire   which threatens to be extinguished in the storm. A number of   those listening to me surely recall the short story in   Lagerkvist’s
Onda Sagor
(1924) [Evil Tales], in which one   sees the child of ten, on a luminous spring day, walking with his   father along the railroad track; they hear together the songs of   the birds in the forest, and then, on their way back, in the   dusk, they are suddenly surprised by the unknown noise which   cleaves the air. «I had an obscure foreboding of what that   meant; it was the anguish which was going to come, all the   unknown, which Father did not know, and from which he could not   protect me. Here is what this world will be, what this life will   be for me, not like Father’s life in which everything was   reassuring and well established. It was not a real world, not a   real life. It was only something ablaze which rushed into the   depths of obscurity, obscurity without end.» This childhood   memory now appears to us as a symbol of the theme that dominates   Pär Lagerkvist’s work; at the same time, one might say that   it proves to us that his subsequent works are authentic and   logically necessary.
It is impossible, with the short time at our disposal today, to   examine all these works in turn. The important thing is that,   while Pär Lagerkvist makes use of different genres, dramatic   or lyric, epic or satiric, his way of grasping reality remains   fundamentally the same. It does not matter in his case if the   results are not always on a level with the intentions, for each   work plays the role of a stone in an edifice he intends to build;   each is a part of his mission, a mission that always bears on the   same subject: the misery and grandeur of what is human, the   slavery to which earthly life condemns us, and the heroic   struggle of the spirit for its liberation. This is the theme in   all the works we choose to recall at this time:
Gäst hos   verkligheten
(1925) [
Guest of Reality
];
Hjärtats sånger
(1926) [Songs from the Heart];
Han som fick leva om sitt liv
(1928) [He Who Lived His   Life Over Again]; Dvärgen (1944) [The Dwarfl];
Barabbas
(1950). It is needless to cite others to give an   idea of the scope of Lagerkvist’s inspirations and the power of   his genius.
One of the foreign experts who, on the fiftieth anniversary of   the Nobel Foundation, criticized the historic series of Nobel   Prize laureates, gave as criteria two conditions which seemed   equally indispensable to him: on the one hand the artistic value   of the finished work, on the other its international reputation.   Insofar as this last condition is concerned, it can immediately   be objected that those who write in a language that is not   widespread will find themselves at a great disadvantage. In any   case, it is extremely rare that a Nordic writer could make a   reputation with the international public, and, therefore, a fair   judgment on this kind of candidate is an especially delicate   matter. However, Nobel’s will explicitly prescribes that the   Prizes should be awarded«without any consideration of   nationality, so that they should be awarded to the worthiest, be   he Scandinavian or not.» That should also signify that if a   writer seems worthy of the Nobel Prize, the fact that he is   Swedish, for example, should not in the end hinder him from   obtaining it. As for Pär Lagerkvist, we must consider   another factor, which pleases us very much: his last work has   attracted much sympathy and esteem outside our frontiers. This   was further proved by the insistent recommendations with which   Lagerkvist’s candidacy has been sustained by a majority of   foreign advisers. He does not owe his Prize to the Academy circle   itself. That the moving interpretations of the inner conflicts of   Barabbas have found such repercussions even in foreign languages   clearly shows the profoundly inspired character of this work,   which is all the more remarkable as the style of it is original   and in a sense untranslatable. Indeed, in this language at once   harsh and sensitive, Lagerkvist’s compatriots often hear the echo   of Småland folklore reechoing under the starry vault of   Biblical legend. This reminds us once more that regional   individuality can sometimes be transformed into something   universal and accessible to all.
On each page of Pär Lagerkvist’s work are words and ideas   which, in their profound and fearful tenderness, carry at the   very heart of their purity a message of terror. Their origin is   in a simple, rustic life, laborious and frugal of words. But   these words, these thoughts, handled by a master, have been   placed at the service of other designs and have been given a   greater purpose, that of raising to the level of art an   interpretation of the time, the world, and man’s eternal   condition. That is why in the statement of the reasons for   awarding the Nobel Prize to Pär Lagerkvist, it seems   legitimate to us to affirm that this national literary production   has risen to the European level.
Dr. Lagerkvist – We who have followed you from close by know how   repugnant it is to you to be placed in the limelight. But since   that seems inevitable at this moment, I beg you only to believe   in the sincerity of our congratulations at the moment when you   receive this award which, according to us, you have deserved more   than any other at the present time. I have been obliged to sing   your praises in front of you. But if the occasion were less   solemn, I would be tempted to tell you quite simply, in the old   Swedish manner: may it bring you happiness.
And now, it remains for me to ask you to receive from the hands   of our King the Nobel Prize in Literature for 1951.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
