Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1952
Nobel Prize in Literature 1952
François Mauriac
- François Mauriac
Swedish Academy
The student of François Mauriac’s   works will be struck from the very first by the insistence with   which Mauriac devotes himself to describing a precise milieu, a   corner of land one can point to on a map of France. The action of   his novels nearly always unfolds in the Gironde, the Bordeaux   region, that old vine-growing country where chateaux and small   farms have taken possession of the earth, or in the Landes, the   country of pine trees and sheep pastures where the song of the   cicadas vibrates in the lonely spaces, and where the Atlantic   sounds its far-off thunder. This is Mauriac’s native country. He   considers it his calling to describe this singular region and its   people, especially those who own the land; and it can be said   that his personal style partakes of the restrained energy which   twists the branches of the grape vines and of the pitiless   clarity of the light which falls from a torrid sky. In that   sense, this writer, who is read the world over, is undeniably and   markedly a man of the province, but his provincialism does not   exclude the great human problems of universal scope. If one wants   to dig deep one must first and always have a ground to thrust   one’s pick into.
Mauriac had a more than usually restricted childhood; he grew up   in the shelter of a milieu in which the maternal influence made   itself strongly felt, an influence which did not cease to act on   his adolescent sensitivity. There is reason to believe that he   had painful surprises later when he made contact with the outside   world. Guided until then by pious advice, he had not suspected   that evil dominated reality to such an extent as it appears in   all the monotony and indifference of everyday life. Catholic by   birth, brought up in a Catholic atmosphere which became his   spiritual country, he has, in short, never had to decide for or   against the Church. But he has on several occasions re-examined   and publicly specified his Christian position, above all in order   to question whether the demands a realist’s position made on the   writer could be reconciled with the commandments and prohibitions   of the Church. Apart from these inevitable and insoluble   antinomies, Mauriac, as a writer, uses the novel to expound a   particular aspect of human life in which Catholic thought and   sensitivity are at the same time background and keystone. Hence,   his non-Catholic readers may to a certain extent feel that they   are looking at a world foreign to them; but to understand   Mauriac, one must remember the one fact without which no account   of him can be complete: he does not belong to the group of   writers who are converts. He himself is conscious of the force   that gives him those roots which permit him to cite a great and   stern tradition when he probes souls overwhelmed by the weight of   their faults and scrutinizes their secret intentions.
Mauriac has been assured a central position in modern literature   for so long and so unquestionably that the denominational   barriers have almost lost all importance. Whereas many writers of   his generation who had a fleeting glory are almost forgotten   today, his profile stands out more and more distinctly with the   years. In his case it is not a question of fame achieved at the   price of compromise, for his sombre and austere vision of the   world is scarcely made to please his contemporaries. He has   always aimed high. With all the power and all the consistency of   which he is capable, he has tried to continue in his realistic   novels the tradition of such great French moralists as Pascal, La   Broyére, and Bossuet. To this let us add that he represents   a tendency toward religious inspiration which, particularly in   France, has always been an extremely important element of   spiritual formation. If I may in this context say a few words   about Mauriac as a distinguished journalist, we must not forget,   in the interest of European thought, his work in that field, his   commentaries on daily events, the entire side of his literary   activity which deserves public esteem.
But if he is today the laureate of the Nobel Prize in Literature,   it is obviously above all because of his admirable novels.   Suffice it to name a few masterpieces such as
Le Désert   de l’amour
(1925) [
The Desert of Love
],
Thérèse Desqueyroux
(1927)   [
Thérèse
], and its sequel
La Fin de la   nuit
(1935) [The End of the Night],
La Pharisienne
(1941) [A Woman of the Pharisees], and
Le Noeud de   vipères
(1932) [The Knot of Vipers], without intending   to say how far the artistic qualities of these works place them   in a class apart; for everywhere, in the whole series of   Mauriac’s novels, are found unforgettable scenes, dialogues, and   situations, so mysteriously and so cruelly revealing. The   repetition of the same themes could create a certain monotony,   but his acute analyses and sure touch awaken the same admiration   with each new encounter. Mauriac remains unequalled in   conciseness and expressive force of language; his prose can in a   few suggestive lines shed light on the most complex and difficult   things. His most remarkable works are characterized by a purity   of logic and classic economy of expression that recall the   tragedies of Racine.
The voiceless anxiety of youth, the abysses of evil and the   perpetual menace of their presence, the deceitful temptations of   the flesh, the ascendancy of avarice in the life of material   goods, the havoc of self-satisfaction and pharisaism – these are   the motifs that constantly reappear under Mauriac’s pen. Small   wonder that in his wielding of such a palette, he has been   accused of blackening his subjects without cause, of writing as a   misanthrope. But the response he gives is that, on the contrary,   a writer who bases his whole concept of the world on grace and   sees man’s supreme recourse in God’s love has the feeling of   working in a spirit of hope and confidence. We have no right to   doubt the sincerity of this declaration, but it is evident that   in practice sin attracts him more than innocence. He detests what   is edifying, and while he never grows tired of portraying the   soul that persists in evil and is on its way to damnation, he   generally prefers to bring down the curtain at the moment when   the consciousness of its misery is about to push the soul toward   repentance and salvation. This writer limits himself to the role   of witness to the negative phase of this evolution, leaving all   the positive side to the priest, who does not have to write a   novel.
Mauriac himself once said that everyone is free to seek   satisfaction in a literature that beautifies life and permits us   to escape from reality, but the predilection which most people   have for this kind of literature should not make us unjust toward   the writers whose vocation is to know man. It is not we who hate   life. Those alone hate life who, not being able to bear the sight   of it, falsify it. The true lovers of life love it as it is. They   have stripped it of its masks, one by one, and have given their   hearts to this monster at last laid bare. In one of his   controversies with Andre Gidé, he returned to the cardinal   point of his thought in affirming that the most complete   sincerity is the form of honour which is linked to the writer’s   craft. Most often Tartuffe is made to appear under the   ecclesiastical costume, but Mauriac assures us that this   personage is found much more frequently in the midst of those   supporting the theory of materialistic progress. It is easy to   deride the principles of morality, but Mauriac objects to such   derision; as he has stated quite simply, «Each of us knows   he could become less evil than he is.»
This simple phrase is perhaps the key that opens the secret of   good in the chapters of Mauriac’s work, the secret of their   sombre ardour and their subtle disharmony. His plunges into the   midst of man’s weaknesses and vices are more than the effect of a   mania pushed to virtuosity. Even when he analyzes reality without   pity, Mauriac preserves a last certainty, that there is a charity   which passes understanding. He does not lay claim to the   absolute; he knows that it does not exist with virtue in the pure   state, and he views without indulgence those who call themselves   pious. Faithful to the truth which he has made his, he strives to   describe his characters in such a way that, seeing themselves as   they are, they would be stricken with repentance and the desire   to become, if not better, at least a little less evil. His novels   can be compared to narrow but deep wells at the bottom of which a   mysterious water is seen glistening in the darkness.
Dear Sir and colleague – In the few moments at my disposal I   could speak about your work only in a sketchy manner. I know how   much it deserves admiration; I also know how difficult it is to   do it justice, to make general statements without ignoring the   specific characteristics of your work. The Swedish Academy has   awarded you this year’s Nobel Prize in Literature «for the   deep spiritual insight and the artistic intensity with which you   have in your novels penetrated the drama of human   life».
There remains for me to extend to you the most heartfelt   congratulations of the Swedish Academy, this younger sister of   your venerable Académie Française, and to ask you to   receive the Prize from the hands of His Majesty the King.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
