Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1953
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 1953
Nobel Prize in Literature 1953
Winston Churchill
- Winston Churchill
Swedish   Academy
Very seldom have great statesmen and   warriors also been great writers. One thinks of Julius Caesar,   Marcus Aurelius, and even Napoleon, whose letters to Josephine   during the first Italian campaign certainly have passion and   splendour. But the man who can most readily be compared with Sir   Winston Churchill is Disraeli, who also was a versatile author.   It can be said of Disraeli as Churchill says of Rosebery, that   «he flourished in an age of great men and small   events». He was never subjected to any really dreadful   ordeals. His writing was partly a political springboard, partly   an emotional safety valve. Through a series of romantic and   self-revealing novels, at times rather difficult to read, he   avenged himself for the humiliation and setbacks that he, the   Jewish stranger in an England ruled by aristocrats, suffered   despite his fantastic career. He was not a great writer but a   great actor, who played his leading part dazzlingly. He could   very well repeat Augustus’ words of farewell: «Applaud, my   friends, the comedy is over!»
Churchill’s John Bull profile stands out effectively against the   elder statesman’s chalk-white, exotic mask with the black lock of   hair on the forehead. The conservative Disraeli revered the   English way of life and tradition which Churchill, radical in   many respects, has in his blood, including steadfastness in the   midst of the storm and the resolute impetus which marks both word   and deed. He wears no mask, shows no sign of cleavage, has no   complex, enigmatic nature. The analytical
morbidezza
,   without which the modern generation finds it hard to imagine an   author, is foreign to him. He is a man for whom reality’s block   has not fallen apart. There, simply, lies the world with its   roads and goals under the sun, the stars, and the banners. His   prose is just as conscious of the goal and the glory as a runner   in the stadium. His every word is half a deed. He is heart and   soul a late Victorian who has been buffeted by the gale, or   rather one who chose of his own accord to breast the storm.
Churchill’s political and literary achievements are of such   magnitude that one is tempted to resort to portray him as a   Caesar who also has the gift of Cicero’s pen. Never before has   one of history’s leading figures been so close to us by virtue of   such an outstanding combination. In his great work about his   ancestor, Marlborough, Churchill writes, «Words are easy and   many, while great deeds are difficult and rare.» Yes, but   great, living, and persuasive words are also difficult and rare.   And Churchill has shown that they too can take on the character   of great deeds.
It is the exciting and colourful side of Churchill’s writing   which perhaps first strikes the reader. Besides much else,
My   Early Life
(1930) is also one of the world’s most   entertaining adventure stories. Even a very youthful mind can   follow with the keenest pleasure the hero’s spirited start in   life as a problem child in school, as a polo-playing lieutenant   in the cavalry (he was considered too dense for the infantry),   and as a war correspondent in Cuba, in the Indian border   districts, in the Sudan, and in South Africa during the Boer War.   Rapid movement, undaunted judgments, and a lively perception   distinguish him even here. As a word-painter the young Churchill   has not only verve but visual acuteness. Later he took up   painting as a hobby, and in
Thoughts and Adventures
(1932)   discourses charmingly on the joy it has given him. He loves   brilliant colours and feels sorry for the poor brown ones.   Nevertheless, Churchill paints better with words. His battle   scenes have a matchless colouring. Danger is man’s oldest   mistress and in the heat of action the young officer was fired to   an almost visionary clear-sightedness. On a visit to Omdurman   many years ago I discovered how the final struggle in the   crushing of the Mahdi’s rebellion, as it is depicted in
The   River War
(1899), was branded on my memory. I could see in   front of me the dervish hordes brandishing their spears and guns,   the ochre-yellow sand ramparts shot to pieces, the Anglo-Egyptian   troops’ methodical advance, and the cavalry charge which nearly   cost Churchill his life.
Even old battles which must be dug out of dusty archives are   described by Churchill with awesome clarity. Trevelyan   masterfully depicts Marlborough’s campaigns, but in illusory   power it is doubtful that Churchill’s historic battle scenes can   be surpassed. Take, for instance, the Battle of Blenheim. One   follows in fascination the moves of the bloody chess game, one   sees the cannon balls plough their furrows through the compact   squares, one is carried away by the thundering charge and fierce   hand-to-hand fighting of the cavalry; and after putting the book   down one can waken in the night in a cold sweat, imagining he is   right in the front rank of English redcoats who, without   wavering, stand among the piles of dead and wounded loading their   rifles and firing their flashing salvoes.
But Churchill became far more than a soldier and a delineator of   war. Even in the strict but brilliant school of the parliamentary   gamble for power he was, perhaps from the outset, something of a   problem child. The young Hotspur learned, however, to bridle his   impetuosity, and he quickly developed into an eminent political   orator with the same gift of repartee as Lloyd George. His   sallies, often severe, excluded neither warmth nor chivalry. In   his alternation between Toryism and radicalism, he followed in   the footsteps of his father, Lord Randolph Churchill. He has also   portrayed the latter’s short, uneasy, tragically interrupted   political and personal life in a work which has an undisputed   place of honour in England’s profuse biographical   literature.
Even the First World War, despite all setbacks, meant a vast   expansion for Churchill as both politician and writer. In his   historical works the personal and the factual elements have been   intimately blended. He knows what he is talking about. In gauging   the dynamics of events, his profound experience is unmistakable.   He is the man who has himself been through the fire, taken risks,   and withstood extreme pressure. This gives his words a vibrating   power. Occasionally, perhaps, the personal side gets the upper   hand. Balfour called
The World Crisis
(1923-29)   «Winston’s brilliant autobiography, disguised as world   history.» With all due respect to archives and documents,   there is something special about history written by a man who has   himself helped to make it.
In his great book on the Duke of Marlborough (1933-38), whose   life’s work is so similar to Churchill’s own, he makes an   intrepid attack on his ancestor’s detractors. I do not know what   professional historians say of his polemic against Macaulay, but   these diatribes against the great general’s persistent haters and   revilers are certainly diverting and temperamental.
The Marlborough book is not only a series of vivid battle scenes   and a skillful defence of the statesman and warrior. It is also a   penetrating study of an enigmatic and unique personality; it   shows that Churchill, in addition to all else, is capable of real   character-drawing. He returns again and again to the confusing   mixture in Marlborough of methodical niggardliness and dazzling   virtuosity: «His private fortune was amassed», he says,   «upon the same principles as marked the staff-work of his   campaigns, and was a part of the same design. It was only in love   or on the battlefield that he took all risks. In these supreme   exaltations he was swept from his system and rule of living, and   blazed resplendent with the heroic virtues. In his marriage and   in his victories the worldly prudence, the calculation, the   reinsurance, which regulated his ordinary life and sustained his   strategy, fell from him like a too heavily embroidered cloak, and   the genius within sprang forth in sure and triumphant   command.» In his military enthusiasm Churchill forgets for a   moment that Marlborough’s famous and dearly loved Sarah was by no   means one to let herself be ordered about. But it is a wonderful   passage.
Churchill regretted that he had never been able to study at   Oxford. He had to devote his leisure hours to educating himself.   But there are certainly no educational gaps noticeable in his   mature prose. Take, for example, Gr
eat Contemporaries
(1937), one of his most charming books. He is said to have   moulded his style on Gibbon, Burke, and Macaulay, but here he is   supremely himself What a deft touch and at the same time what a   fund of human knowledge, generosity, and gay malice are in this   portrait gallery!
Churchill’s reaction to
Bernard   Shaw
is very amusing, a piquant meeting between two of   England’s greatest literary personalities. Churchill cannot   resist poking fun at Shaw’s blithely irresponsible talk and   flippancy, which contrasted with the latter’s fundamental   gravity. Half amused, half appalled, he winces at the way in   which the incorrigibly clowning genius was forever tripping   himself up and turning somersaults between the most extreme   antitheses. It is the contrast between the writer, who must at   all costs create surprises, and the statesman, whose task it is   to meet and master them.
It is not easy to sum up briefly the greatness of Churchill’s   style. He says of his old friend, the Liberal statesman, John   Morley, «Though in conversation he paraded and   manœuvred nimbly and elegantly around his own convictions,   offering his salutations and the gay compliments of old-time war   to the other side, [he] always returned to his fortified camp to   sleep.» As a stylist Churchill himself, despite his   mettlesome chivalry, is not prone to such amiable arabesques. He   does not beat about the bush, but is a man of plain speaking. His   fervour is realistic, his striking – power is tempered only by   broad-mindedness and humour. He knows that a good story tells   itself. He scorns unnecessary frills and his metaphors are rare   but expressive.
Behind Churchill the writer is Churchill the orator – hence the   resilience and pungency of his phrases. We often characterize   ourselves unconsciously through the praise we give others.   Churchill, for instance, says of another of his friends, Lord   Birkenhead, «As he warmed to his subject, there grew that   glow of conviction and appeal, instinctive and priceless, which   constitutes true eloquence.» The words might with greater   justification have been said of Churchill himself.
The famous desert warrior, Lawrence of Arabia, the author of
The      Seven Pillars of Wisdom
, is another who has both made and      written history. Of him Churchill says, «Just as an      aeroplane only flies by its speed and pressure against the      air, so he flew best and easiest in the hurricane.» It is      again striking how Churchill here too speaks of the same      genius that carried his own words through the storm of      events.
Churchill’s mature oratory is swift, unerring in its aim, and   moving in its grandeur. There is the power which forges the links   of history. Napoleon’s proclamations were often effective in   their lapidary style. But Churchill’s eloquence in the fateful   hours of freedom and human dignity was heart-stirring in quite   another way. With his great speeches he has, perhaps, himself   erected his most enduring monument.
Lady Churchill – The Swedish Academy expresses its joy at your   presence and asks you to convey to Sir Winston a greeting of deep   respect. A literary prize is intended to cast lustre over the   author, but here it is the author who gives lustre to the prize.   I ask you now to accept, on behalf of your husband, the 1953   Nobel Prize in Literature from the hands of His Majesty the   King.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
