Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1954
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 1954
Nobel Prize in Literature 1954
Ernest Hemingway
- Ernest Hemingway
Swedish Academy
In our modern age, American authors have   set their stamp more and more strongly on the general physiognomy   of literature. Our generation in particular has, during the last   few decades, seen a reorientation of literary interest which   implies not only a temporary change in the market but, indeed, a   shifting of the mental horizon, with far-reaching consequences.   All these swiftly rising new authors from the United States,   whose names we now recognize as stimulating signals, had one   thing in common: they took full advantage of the Americanism to   which they were born. And the European public greeted them with   enthusiasm; it was the general wish that Americans should write   as Americans, thereby making their own contribution to the   contest in the international arena.
One of these pioneers is the author who is now the focus of   attention. It is hardly an exaggeration to say that Ernest   Hemingway, more than any of his American colleagues, makes us   feel we are confronted by a still young nation which seeks and   finds its exact form of expression. A dramatic tempo and sharp   curves have also characterized Hemingway’s own existence, in many   ways so unlike that of the average literary man. With him, this   vital energy goes its own way, independent of the pessimism and   the disillusionment so typical of the age. Hemingway evolved his   style in the herd school of journalistic reporting. In the   editorial office of the Kansas City newspaper where he served his   apprenticeship, there was a kind of pressman’s catechism, the   first dictum of which was: «Use short sentences. Use short   paragraphs.» Hemingway’s purely technical training clearly   led to an artistic self-discipline of uncommon strength.   Rhetoric, he has said, is merely the blue sparks from the dynamo.   His master in older American literature was Mark Twain in
Huckleberry Finn
, with its rhythmical stream of direct and   unconventional narrative prose.
The young journalist from Illinois was flung headlong into the   First World War when he volunteered to serve as an ambulance   driver in Italy, where he received his baptism of fire at the   Piave front and was severely wounded by shell splinters. The   nineteen-year-old’s first violent experience of war is an   essential factor in Hemingway’s biography. Not that he was   daunted by it; on the contrary, he found that it was a priceless   asset for a writer to see war at first hand – like Tolstoy at   Sevastopol – and to be able to depict it truthfully. Several   years were to elapse, however, before he could bring himself to   give an artistically complete account of his painfully confused   impressions from the Piave front in 1918: the result was the   novel
A Farewell to Arms
in 1929, with which he really   made his name, even if two very talented books with a European   post-war setting,
In Our Time
(1942) and
The Sun Also   Rises
(1926), had already given proof of his individuality as   a storyteller. In the following years, his instinctive   predilection for harrowing scenes of action and grim spectacle   drew him to Africa with its big-game hunting and to Spain with   its bullfighting. When the latter country was transformed into a   theatre of war, he found inspiration there for his second   significant novel,
For Whom the Bell Tolls
(1940), in   which an American champion of liberty fights for «man’s   dignity» – a book in which the writer’s personal feelings   seem more deeply involved than anywhere else.
When mentioning these principal elements in his production, one   should not forget that his narrative skill often attains its   highest point when cast in a smaller mould, in the laconic,   drastically pruned short story, which, with a unique combination   of simplicity and precision, nails its theme into our   consciousness so that every blow tells. Such a masterpiece, more   than any other, is
The Old Man and the Sea
(1952), the   unforgettable story of an old Cuban fisherman’s duel with a huge   swordfish in the Atlantic. Within the frame of a sporting tale, a   moving perspective of man’s destiny is opened up; the story is a   tribute to the fighting spirit, which does not give in even if   the material gain is nil, a tribute to the moral victory in the   midst of defeat. The drama is enacted before our eyes, hour by   hour, allowing the robust details to accumulate and take on   momentous significance. «But man is not made for   defeat», the book says. «A man can be destroyed but not   defeated.»
It may be true that Hemingway’s earlier writings display brutal,   cynical, and callous sides which may be considered at variance   with the Nobel Prize’s requirement for a work of an ideal   tendency. But on the other hand, he also possesses a heroic   pathos which forms the basic element in his awareness of life, a   manly love of danger and adventure with a natural admiration for   every individual who fights the good fight in a world of reality   overshadowed by violence and death. In any event, this is the   positive side of his cult of manliness, which otherwise is apt to   become demonstrative, thereby defeating its own ends. It should   be remembered, however, that courage is Hemingway’s central theme   – the bearing of one who is put to the test and who steels   himself to meet the cold cruelty of existence, without, by so   doing, repudiating the great and generous moments.
On the other hand, Hemingway is not one of those authors who   write to illustrate theses and principles of one kind or another.   A descriptive writer must be objective and not try to play God   the Father – this he learned while still in the editorial office   in Kansas City. That is why he can conceive of war as a tragic   fate having a decisive effect on the whole of his generation; but   he views it with a calm realism, void of illusion, which disdains   all emotional comment, a disciplined objectivity, stronger   because it is hard-won.
Hemingway’s significance as one of this epoch’s great moulders of   style is apparent in both American and European narrative art   over the past twenty-five years, chiefly in the vivid dialogue   and the verbal thrust and parry, in which he has set a standard   as easy to imitate as it is difficult to attain. With masterly   skill he reproduces all the nuances of the spoken word, as well   as those pauses in which thought stands still and the nervous   mechanism is thrown out of gear. It may sometimes sound like   small talk, but it is not trivial when one gets to know his   method. He prefers to leave the work of psychological reflection   to his readers, and this freedom is of great benefit to him in   spontaneous observation.
When one surveys Hemingway’s production, definite scenes flare up   in the memory – Lieutenant Henry’s flight in the rain and mud   after the panic at Caporetto, the desperate blowing up of the   bridge in the Spanish mountains when Jordan sacrifices his life,   or the old fisherman’s solitary fight with the sharks in the   nocturnal glow of lights from Havana.
Moreover, one may trace a distinctive linking thread – let us say   a symbolic warp reaching back a hundred years in the loom of time   – between Hemingway’s latest work,
The Old Man and The   Sea
, and one of the classic creations of American literature,   Herman   Melville’s novel
Moby Dick
, the white whale who is   pursued in blind rage by his enemy, the monomaniac sea captain.   Neither Melville nor Hemingway wanted to create an allegory; the   salt ocean depths with all their monsters are sufficiently   rewarding as a poetic element. But with different means, those of   romanticism and of realism, they both attain the same theme – a   man’s capacity of endurance and, if need be, of at least daring   the impossible. «A man can be destroyed but not   defeated.»
This year’s Nobel Prize in Literature has therefore been awarded   to one of the great authors of our time, one of those who,   honestly and undauntedly, reproduces genuine features in the hard   countenance of the age. Hemingway, now fifty-six years old, is   the fifth American author so far to be honoured in this way. As   the Prize winner himself is unfortunately unable to be present   for reasons of health, the Prize will now be handed to the United   States Ambassador.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
