Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1955
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 1955
Nobel Prize in Literature 1955
Halldór Laxness
- Halldór Laxness
Swedish   Academy
Iceland is the cradle of narrative art here   in the North. This is ultimately due to the peculiar nature and   development of the Icelandic community. In Iceland there were no   conditions for the rise of the class society elsewhere so   characteristic of the Middle Ages, with its sharp contrast   between Church and people, between the learned and the peasants.   There books were not, as in other lands, the privilege of a few   priests versed in Latin. Even in the Middle Ages literacy was far   more widespread among the common people in Iceland than in other   parts of Europe. This fact created the basic conditions for the   writing down in the native tongue of the old vernacular poetry   which, in the rest of northern Europe, our country included, was   despised and forgotten.
So it came about that the poor little nation on its remote island   created world literature, producing prose tales which the other   European countries were unable to match for hundreds of years.
Snorre
and the sagas will always stand out as peaks in the   art of historical narrative, as models of style in their   perspicuity, clarity, and vigour. The Icelandic saga, very   largely anonymous, is the product of a whole nation’s literary   talent and independent creative power.
In Iceland the saga has always been held in great honour. To the   Icelanders themselves it has given consolation and strength   during dark centuries of poverty and hardship. To this very day   Iceland stands out as the literary nation of the North
par   excellence
, in relation to its population and its   resources.
Enormous power is necessary to renew in our time a narrative art   which has such traditions. In the book which Halldór Laxness   has written about the peasant poet Olafur   Ljósvíkíngur, he especially touches on the   problems and the mission of poetry, making one of the characters   say: “That poem is good which reaches the heart of the people.   There is no other criterion”. But in order to reach the people’s   heart, literary skill alone, however great, is not enough; the   ability to depict events and exploits is not enough. If   literature is to be a “light of the world”, it must strive to   give a true picture of human life and conditions. That goal runs   like a continuous thread through most of what Halldór   Laxness has written. And as he has an extraordinarily fine sense   of the concrete things of human life and, at the same time, an   inexhaustible gift of storytelling, he has come to rank as his   people’s greatest writer of the present age.
One of the most remarkable testimonies of the conflicts in modern   cultural life – not only in Iceland but in the whole of the West   – is Laxness’s early work,
Vefarinn mikli frá Kasmir
(The Great Weaver from Kashmir), 1927. Despite a certain youthful   immaturity, it carries weight as a contemporary document and as a   personal confession. The main character is a young Icelander, a   writer with an artistic temperament, who, during a roving life in   Europe, experiences to the full the chaotic perplexity following   the First World War. Like Hans Alienus at one time, he tries to   get his bearings and to find a firm footing in life – but what a   difference in situation! Far more than a generation in time   separates them. On the one hand, peace, unshakable faith in   progress, dreams of beauty; on the other, a shattered, bleeding   world, moral laxity, anguish, and impotence. Steinn Ellioi   finally throws himself into the arms of the Catholic Church.   Since Strindberg, few books in the literature of   northern Europe have bared inner conflicts with such   uncompromising candour and shown how the indi vidual comes to   terms with the forces of the age.
Halldór Laxness did not attain artistic balance until,   toward the end of the twenties, he returned to Iceland and found   his calling as bard of the Icelandic people. All his important   books have Icelandic themes.
He is an excellent painter of Icelandic scenery and settings. Yet   this is not what he has conceived as his chief mission.   “Compassion is the source of the highest poetry. Compassion with   Ásta Sóllilja on earth”, he says in one of his best   books. Art must be supported by sympathy and love for humanity;   otherwise it is worth very little. And a social passion underlies   everything Halldór Laxness has written. His personal   championship of contemporary social and political questions is   always very strong, sometimes so strong that it threatens to   hamper the artistic side of his work. His safeguard then is the   astringent humour which enables him to see even people he   dislikes in a redeeming light, and which also permits him to gaze   far down into the labyrinths of the human soul.
Individual people and their destinies always move us most deeply   in Halldór Laxness’s novels. Against the dark background of   poverty, strikes, and strife in the little Icelandic fishing   village, the shining, girlish figure of Salka Valka stands out,   resolute, capable, and pure of heart.
Even more affecting, perhaps, is the story of Bjartur, the man   with the indomitable will for freedom and independence, Geijer’s   yeoman farmer in an Icelandic setting and, with monumental, epic   proportions, the settler, the
landnámsman
of   Iceland’s thousand-year-old history. Bjartur remains the same in   sickness and misfortune, in poverty and starvation, in raging   snowstorms and face to face with the frightening monsters of the   moors, and pathetic to the last in his helplessness and his   touching love for his foster daughter, Ásta   Sóllilja.
The story of the peasant poet Olafur Ljósvíkíngur,
Ljós heimsins
(The Light of the World), 1937-40, is   possibly his greatest work. It is based on the contrast between a   miserable environment and the heaven-born dreams of one who is a   friend and servant of beauty.
In
Islandsklukkan
(The Bell of Iceland), 1943-46, Laxness   for the first time sets the scene in a bygone age. And he indeed   succeeds in giving the atmosphere of the period both of Iceland   and of Denmark. Stylistically, it is a masterpiece. But even here   it is chiefly individuals and their destinies that one remembers:   the wretched tatterdemalion Jón Hreggviosson; “the fair   maid” Snaefriour Eydalín; and above all, the learned   collector of manuscripts, Arnas Arnaeus, in whom Iceland lives   more robustly than in anyone else.
Halldór Laxness has guided literary development back to   common and traditional ground. That is his great achievement. He   has a vivid and personal style, easy and natural, and one gets a   strong impression of how well and how flexibly it serves his   ends.
One more thing must be emphasized if Laxness’s position is to be   properly understood. There was a time when the Icelandic authors   chose another Scandinavian language for their art, not merely for   economic reasons, but because they despaired of the Icelandic   language as an instrument for artistic creation. Halldór   Laxness has, in the field of prose, renewed the Icelandic   language as an artistic means of expression for a modern content,   and by his example he has given the Icelandic writers courage to   use their native tongue. Broadly speaking, therein lies his   greatest significance, and this is what has given him a strong   and very respected position in his own land.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
