Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1956
Nobel Prize in Literature 1956
Juan Ramón Jiménez
- Juan Ramón Jiménez
Swedish   Academy
A long life consecrated to poetry and to   beauty has been honoured this year with the Nobel Prize in   Literature. He is an old gardener, this Juan Ramón, who has   dedicated half a century to the creation of a new rose, a white   mystical rose, which will bear his name.
Jardines lejanos
(Distant Gardens), 1904, is one of his   books from the beginning of the century. In the southern parts of   Andalusia, far off the route from Jerez to Seville well known to   Swedish tourists, the poet was born in 1881. But his poetry is   not a strong and intoxicating wine, and his work not a grandiose   mosque turned into a cathedral. It makes you think, rather, of   one of those gardens circled by high, whitewashed walls which you   see marking a landscape. He who stops a moment and goes in with   his camera runs the risk of being deceived. There is nothing   singular or picturesque here, only the usual things: fruit trees   and the air which vibrates on passing through them, the pond that   reflects the sun and the moon, a bird singing. No small minaret   has been transformed into an ivory tower in this fertile garden   planted in the soil of Arab culture. But the visitor who lingers   will notice that the passivity within the walls is deceiving,   that the isolation is only of the circumstantial and transitory,   of what pretends to be present. He will not fail to observe that   the rose has a radiance which demands sharper senses and a new   sensibility. There is a beauty which is more than the play and   delight of the senses; in front of the visitor the silent   gardener suddenly appears like a strict director of souls. At the   entrance of the Juanramonian garden the tourist ought to observe   the same rules as on entering a mosque: wash his hands and rinse   his mouth in the fountain for ablutions, take off his shoes,   etc.
The year in which Ramón Jiménez began to publish his   melodious verses was, in the history of Spain, a year for an   examination of conscience. On December 10, 1898, in Paris, was   signed the treaty with the United States by which Spain lost   Cuba, Puerto Rico, and the Philippines, as well as what remained   of its navy and its prestige. By a stroke of the pen the remnants   of a whole colonial empire were eliminated. In Madrid a group of   writers took up the pen to reconquer, in their fashion, the world   within the boundaries of Spain. Some of them ultimately attained   their goals. The Machado brothers, Valle-Inclán, and Unamuno   were among them. The “modernists”, as they called themselves, had   in turn grouped themselves around their leader, the Nicaraguan   Rubén Darío, visiting in Spain. It was Darío also   who, at the beginning of the century, sponsored the first book of   verses of the new poet, Juan Ramón Jiménez, a book   which bore the scarcely martial title,
Almas de violeta
(Souls of Violet), 1900.
He was not an audacious creator who would present himself on   stage in full light. His song arrived, timid and intimate, from a   penumbral background, and spoke of the moon and of melancholy   with echoes of Schumann and Chopin. He wept with Heine and with   his countryman, inspired by Heine, Gustavo Adolfo Bécquer,   the exquisite poet to whom some short-sighted admirers gave the   name, “golden-haired Nordic King”. In the manner of Verlaine he   murmured his
Arias tristes
(Sad Arias), 1903, in a   half-voice. When, little by little but with sure step, he had   freed himself from the gentle, captivating arms of French   symbolism, the characteristic features of music and intimacy   would remain forever impressed on him.
Music and painting – we can note that, in Seville, the young   student also studied to be a painter. Just as we speak of the   blue and rose periods of Picasso, who was born in the same year,   as the historians of literature have called attention to the   predominance of different colours in the work of Ramón   Jiménez. To the first period belong all the poems in yellow   and green – the famous green poem of his disciple Garcia Lorca   has its origin here. Later, white predominates, and the nakedness   of white characterizes the brilliant, decisive epoch which   includes what has been called the second poetic style of Juan   Ramón. Here we witness the long period of plenitude of a   poet of light. Far off are the melancholy mood-pictures, far off   also the anecdotal themes. The poems treat only of poetry and   love, and of the landscape and the sea which are identified with   poetry and love. A formal asceticism carried to perfection,   rejecting every exterior embellishment of the verse, will be the   road that will lead to the simplicity that is the supreme form of   art, the poetry that the poet calls naked.
This “second style of Juan Ramón” reaches its full   development in
Diario de un poeta recién casado
(Diary of a Newly-Wed Poet) in 1917. In this year the newly-wed   poet made his first trip to America and his diary is full of an   infinite feeling for the sea, full of oceanic poetry. His books
Eternidades
(Eternities), 1918, and
Piedra y cielo
(Stone and Sky), 1919 mark new stages toward the longed-for   identification of the “I” with the world; poetry and thought have   the purpose of finding “the exact name for things”. Gradually the   poems become more concise, naked, transparent; they are, in fact,   maxims and aphorisms of the mystical poetics of Juan   Ramón.
In his constant zeal to surpass previous achievements, Ramón   Jiménez has made a clean slate of his earliest production   and has radically modified old poems, gathering those meriting   his approval into extensive anthologies. After his volumes
Belleza
(Beauty) and Poesía (Poetry) in 1923, in his   zeal to experiment with new forms, he abandoned the publication   of his works in book form and often published without title or   author’s name, in the form of sheets or leaflets scattered by the   wind. In 1936 the civil war interrupted the projected edition of   his works in twenty-one volumes.
Animal de fondo
(Animal   of Depth), 1949, the last book from his period of exile, is, if   read by itself, a sample of a work in progress. Today, therefore,   it is still premature to discuss this phase which, in literary   history, will perhaps carry the title “the last style of Juan   Ramón”.
Far away, in what was the colony of Puerto Rico, he is afflicted   today by an immense sorrow. It will not be possible for us to see   his thin face with its profound eyes and to ask ourselves if it   has been taken directly from a painting by El Greco. We find a   less solemn self-portrait in the delightful book,
Platero y   yo
(Platero and I), 1914. There, dressed in mourning, the   poet passes with his Nazarene beard, riding his little donkey   while the gypsy children shout at the top of their voices: The   madman! The madman! The madman! … And in truth it is not always   easy to distinguish a madman from a poet. But for like spirits   the madness of this man has been eminent wisdom. Rafael Alberti,   Jorge Guillén, Pedro Salinas, and others who have written   their names in the recent history of Spanish poetry have been his   disciples; Federico Garcia Lorca is one of them, and so are the   Latin American poets, with
Gabriela   Mistral
at their head. I cite the statement of a Swedish   journalist on being informed of the Nobel Prize in Literature for   this year: “Juan Ramón Jiménez is a born poet, one of   those who are born one day with the same simplicity with which   the sun’s rays shine, one who purely and simply has been born and   has given of himself, unconscious of his natural talents. We do   not know when such a poet is born. We know only that one day we   find him, we see him, we hear him, just as one day we see a plant   flower. We call this a miracle”.
In the annals of the Nobel Prize, Spanish literature has been one   of the distant gardens. Very rarely have we cast a glance inside.   This year’s laureate is the last survivor of the famous   “generation of 1898”. For a generation of poets on both sides of   the ocean which separates, and at the same time, unites the   Hispanic countries, he has been a master – the master, in effect.   When the Swedish Academy renders homage to Juan Ramón   Jiménez, it renders homage also to an entire epoch in the   glorious Spanish literature.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
