Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1957
Nobel Prize in Literature 1957
Albert Camus
- Albert Camus
Swedish Academy
French literature is no longer linked   geographically to the frontiers of France in Europe. In many   respects it reminds one of a garden plant, noble and   irreplaceable, which when cultivated outside its territory still   retains its distinctive character, although tradition and   variation alternately influence it. The Nobel Laureate for this   year, Albert Camus, is an example of this evolution. Born in a   small town in eastern Algeria, he has returned to this North   African milieu to find the source of all the determining   influences that have marked his childhood and youth. Even today,   the man Camus is aware of this great French overseas territory,   and the writer in him is often pleased to recall this fact.
From a quasi-proletarian origin, Camus found it necessary to get   ahead in life on his own; a poverty-stricken student, he worked   at all sorts of jobs to meet his needs. It was an arduous   schooling, but one which, in the diversity of its teaching, was   certainly not useless to the realist he was to become. In the   course of his years of study, which he spent at the University of   Algiers, he belonged to a circle of intellectuals who later came   to play an important role in the North African Resistance. His   first books were published by a local publishing house in   Algiers, but at the age of twenty-five he reached France as a   journalist and soon came to make his reputation in the metropolis   as a writer of the first rank, prematurely tempered by the harsh,   feverish atmosphere of the war years.
Even in his first writings Camus reveals a spiritual attitude   that was born of the sharp contradictions within him between the   awareness of earthly life and the gripping consciousness of the   reality of death. This is more than the typical Mediterranean   fatalism whose origin is the certainty that the sunny splendour   of the world is only a fugitive moment bound to be blotted out by   the shades. Camus represents also the philosophical movement   called Existentialism, which characterizes man’s situation in the   universe by denying it all personal significance, seeing in it   only absurdity. The term “absurd” occurs often in Camus’s   writings, so that one may call it a leitmotif in his work,   developed in all its logical moral consequences on the levels of   freedom, responsibility, and the anguish that derives from it.   The Greek myth of Sisyphus, who eternally rolls his rock to the   mountain top from which it perpetually rolls down again, becomes,   in one of Camus’s essays, a laconic symbol of human life. But   Sisyphus, as Camus interprets him, is happy in the depth of his   soul, for the attempt alone satisfies him. For Camus, the   essential thing is no longer to know whether life is worth living   but
how
one must live it, with the share of sufferings it   entails.
This short presentation does not permit me to dwell longer on   Camus’s always fascinating intellectual development. It is more   worthwhile to refer to the works in which, using an art with   complete classical purity of style and intense concentration, he   has embodied these problems in such fashion that characters and   action make his ideas live before us, without commentary by the   author. This is what makes
L’Étranger
(The Stranger),   1942, famous. The main character, an employee of a government   department, kills an Arab following a chain of absurd events;   then, indifferent to his fate, he hears himself condemned to   death. At the last moment, however, he pulls himself together and   emerges from a passivity bordering on torpor. In
La Peste
(The Plague), 1947, a symbolic novel of greater scope, the main   characters are Doctor Rieux and his assistant, who heroically   combat the plague that has descended on a North African town. In   its calm and exact objectivity, this convincingly realistic   narrative reflects experiences of life during the Resistance, and   Camus extols the revolt which the conquering evil arouses in the   heart of the intensely resigned and disillusioned man.
Quite recently Camus has given us the very remarkable   story-monologue,
La Chute
(The Fall), 1956, a work   exhibiting the same mastery of the art of storytelling. A French   lawyer, who examines his conscience in a sailors’ bar in   Amsterdam, draws his own portrait, a mirror in which his   contemporaries can equally recognize themselves. In these pages   one can see Tartuffe shake hands with the Misanthrope in the name   of that science of the human heart in which classical France   excelled. The mordant irony, employed by an aggressive author   obsessed with truth, becomes a weapon against universal   hypocrisy. One may wonder, of course, where Camus is heading by   his insistence on a Kierkegaardian sense of guilt whose   bottomless abyss is omnipresent, for one always has the feeling   that the author has reached a turning point in his   development.
Personally Camus has moved far beyond nihilism. His serious,   austere meditations on the duty of restoring without respite that   which has been ravaged, and of making justice possible in an   unjust world, rather make him a humanist who has not forgotten   the worship of Greek proportion and beauty as they were once   revealed to him in the dazzling summer light on the Mediterranean   shore at Tipasa.
Active and highly creative, Camus is in the centre of interest in   the literary world, even outside of France. Inspired by an   authentic moral engagement, he devotes himself with all his being   to the great fundamental questions of life, and certainly this   aspiration corresponds to the idealistic end for which the Nobel   Prize was established. Behind his incessant affirmation of the   absurdity of the human condition is no sterile negativism. This   view of things is supplemented in him by a powerful imperative, a   nevertheless, an appeal to the will which incites to revolt   against absurdity and which, for that reason, creates a   value.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
