Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1959
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 1959
Nobel Prize in Literature 1959
Salvatore Quasimodo
- Salvatore Quasimodo
Swedish Academy
Salvatore Quasimodo, the Italian poet who   has been awarded this year’s Nobel Prize in Literature, is a   Sicilian by birth. He was born near Syracuse, to be more exact,   in the little town of Modica some distance from the coast. It is   not difficult to imagine that a region so rich in memories of the   past must have been of the utmost importance for his future   calling. The relics of the ancient Greek temples on the island,   the theatres near the Ionian Sea, Arethusa’s fountain, so famed   in legend, the gigantic ruins at Girgenti and Slinunte – what a   playground for a child’s imagination! Here in days gone by the   heroes of Greek poetry were guests at the court of King Hieron,   here the voices of Pindar and Aeschylus linger like an echo   through the ages.
Even if, as far as material matters are concerned, Quasimodo was   reared in comparative poverty, the milieu in which he spent his   youth was nevertheless something to be grateful for. Admittedly,   many restless years of travel were to pass before he became   conscious of his talent and began to find his way in the   classical heritage that was his. In due course, however, his   studies were to show their influence in his great contribution as   a translator of the literature of classical antiquity which now   forms the homogeneous background of his own work as one of the   foremost poets in the Italian language. There can hardly be any   doubt that his strict classical education acted as a stimulus,   not to servile imitation, but to energetic self-discipline in the   use of language and the achievement of artistic style. Although   regarded as one of the principal innovators in modern poetry,   Quasimodo is, nevertheless, bound to the classical tradition and   occupies this place with all the natural confidence of a true   heir.
Quasimodo made his debut as early as 1930 but it was not until   the forties and fifties that he established his position as one   of Italy’s most outstanding poets, and by this time his   reputation had become international. He belongs to the same   generation as Silone, Moravia, and Vittorini, that is, the   generation of left-wing authors who were able to prove their   worth only after the fall of Fascism. Quasimodo is like these   writers in that for him, too, the fate of present-day Italy is a   reality in which he is deeply involved. His literary production   is not very large. In actual fact it consists of five books of   poetry, which reveal his development to complete individuality   and originality. I quote the characteristic titles of the   volumes:
Ed è subito sera
(And Suddenly It’s   Evening), published in 1942,
Giorno dopo giorno
(Day after   Day), in 1946,
La vita non è sogno
(Life Is Not a   Dream), in 1949,
Il falso e vero verde
(The False and the   True Green), in I956, and finally,
La terra impareggiabile
(The Incomparable Earth), in 1958. Together they form one   homogeneous work in which not a single line is unimportant.
Quasimodo has sung of the Sicily of his childhood and his youth   with a love that, since he went to live in the north of Italy,   has gained an ever-increasing depth and perspective – the   windswept island scenery with its Greek temple columns, its   desolate grandeur, its poverty-stricken villages, its dusty roads   winding through olive groves, its strident music of pounding surf   and shepherds’ horns. Nonetheless, he cannot be called a   provincial poet. The area from which he draws his themes   gradually increases, while at the same time his human pathos   breaks through the strict poetic form which first fettered him.   Above all, the bitter experiences of the war provided the impulse   for this change and made him an interpreter of the moral life of   his fellow countrymen in their daily experience of nameless   tragedies and constant confrontation with death. In this later   period he has created a number of poems that are so monumental   that one would like to believe that they will be accepted as a   lasting contribution to the world’s great poetry. Naturally,   Quasimodo is far from being the only Italian poet to be deeply   affected in this way by the martyrdom of his country and its   people, but the Sicilian poet’s dark and passionate earnestness   rings with a special and individual note when he ends one of his   lyrics with the cry:
However much everything else is       distorted
The dead can never be sold.
Italy is my country, o stranger,
It is of its people I sing, and of the sound
Of secret lamentation that comes from its sea,
I sing of its mothers’ chaste grief, of all its life.
Quasimodo is of the bold opinion that   poetry does not exist for its own sake, but has an irrefutable   mission in the world, through its creative power, to recreate man   himself. To him, the road to freedom is the same as the conquest   of isolation, and his own progress points in the same direction.   In this way his work has become a living voice and his poetry an   artistic expression of the consciousness of the Italian people,   as far as this is possible for poetry with an otherwise so   concise and individual structure. In his poems, Biblical turns of   phrase are to be found side by side with allusions to classical   mythology, that mythology which is an ever-present source of   inspiration for a Sicilian. Christian compassion is the basic   quality of his poetry, which, in moments of greatest inspiration,   attains universality.
Dear Sir – The following statement pronounced by the Swedish   Academy is the reason for which you have been awarded the Nobel   Prize: “for his lyric poetry, which, with classical fire,   expresses the tragic experience of life in our own times”.
Your poetry has come to us as an authentic and vivid message of   that Italy which has had faithful friends and admirers in our   nation for centuries. With our most cordial congratulations I ask   you to receive the Nobel Prize in Literature from His Majesty,   the King.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
