Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1960
Nobel Prize in Literature 1960
Saint-John Perse
- Saint-John Perse
Swedish Academy
The Nobel Prize laureate in literature for   this year bears a name of unusual sound, which he chose at first   to protect himself from the curious. Saint-John Perse is the   poet’s name that was to be made internationally famous by a   private man who in civil life is called Alexis Léger and, as   such, was to acquire great prestige in another domain of public   life. Thus his life is divided into two periods, one of which has   ended whereas the other is continuing: Alexis Léger, the   diplomat, has been transformed into Saint-John Perse, the   poet.
Considered as a literary personage, he presents a biography   remarkable in many respects. Born in 1887 in Guadeloupe, he   belonged to a French family that came to settle there as early as   the seventeenth century. He spent his childhood in this tropical   Eden of the Antilles, all rustling with palms, but at the age of   eleven he left for France with his family. He was educated at Pau   and at Bordeaux, decided to take a degree in law, and in 1914   entered upon a diplomatic career. Sent first to Peking, he next   found himself entrusted with increasingly important assignments.   As Secretary General for the Ministry of Foreign Affairs for   several years, with the rank of Councillor of State, he assumed   major responsibilities during the political events that were the   prelude to the Second World War.
After the defeat of France in 1940 he was abruptly suspended and   went into exile, was considered a dangerous adversary by the   Vichy regime, and was even deprived of his French citizenship. He   found refuge in Washington, where he occupied a position as   literary adviser to the Library of Congress. The French state was soon to   reinstate him in his full rights, but the exile firmly refused to   reenter diplomacy. In recent years, however, he has repeatedly   returned to France for private reasons.
Here is a career which opens vast vistas and which presupposes in   the one who succeeds in it a breadth of perspective acquired   under many conditions, combined with a spiritual tone of uncommon   dynamic quality. This international versatility, the hallmark of   the great traveller, constitutes moreover one of the themes often   repeated in the poet’s work. He owed his first success to the   cycle of poems entitled
Pour fêter une enfance
(To   Celebrate a Childhood), 1910, whose dazzling imagery evokes in   the golden dawn of childhood memories the exotic paradise of   Guadeloupe, its fabulous plants and animals. From China he   brought back an epic poem,
Anabase
(Anabasis), 1924, which   relates, in a form suggestive and hard as enamel, a mysterious   warlike expedition into the Asian deserts. The same,   uncompromisingly dense form, in which verse and prose are united   in a solemn flow blending Biblical verse with the rhythm of the   Alexandrine, is found again in the collections of poems which   followed:
Exil
(Exile), 1942, and
Vents
(Winds),   1946, both written in America. They constitute an imposing   statement of the uninterrupted cycle of degeneration and   rejuvenation, while
Amers
(Seamarks), 1957, celebrates the   sea, the eternal dispenser of power, the first cradle of   civilizations.
These works are, it is true, of marked singularity, complicated   in form and thought, but the master who created them is anything   but exclusive, if one means by that that he immures himself in a   satisfied autonomy and is interested only in himself. Quite the   contrary; his dominating quality is the wish to express the   human, seized in all its multiplicity, all its continuity; the   wish to describe man, forever the creator, struggling from   century to century against the equally perpetual insubordination   of the elements. He identifies himself with all the races who   have lived on our stormy planet. “Our race is old”, he said in a   poem, “our face is nameless. And time knows much about all the   men that we may have been… the ocean of things besets us. Death   is at the porthole, but our route is not there”.
In this exaltation of man’s creative power, Saint-John Perse may   sometimes recall the hymns of the German poet, Hölderlin,   who also was a magician of speech, filled with the grandeur of   the poetic vocation. It is very easy to treat this sublime faith   in the power of poetry as a paradox in order to belittle it,   especially when it seems to assert itself with a force inversely   proportional to the need of arousing an immediate response to the   thirst for human communion. On the other hand, Saint-John Perse   is an eloquent example of the isolation and estrangement which in   our era are a vital condition for poetic creation when its aim is   high.
One can only admire the integrity of his poetic attitude, the   lofty insistence with which he perseveres in the only mode of   expression that allows him to realize his intentions, an   exclusive but always pertinent form. The inexhaustible luxuriance   of the picturesque style of his rhapsodies is intellectually   demanding and may weary the reader of whom the poet demands such   efforts of concentration. He takes his metaphors from all   disciplines, from all eras, from all mythologies, from all   regions; his cycles of poems call to mind those great sea shells   from which a cosmic music seems to emanate. This expansive   imagination is his strength. Exile, separation – evocations whose   voiceless murmur gives his poetry its general tonality; and   through the double theme of man’s strength and helplessness a   heroic appeal can be perceived, an appeal which is perhaps   expressed more distinctly than before in the poet’s latest work,
Chronique
(Chronicle), 1960, filled with a breath of   grandeur, in which the poet recapitulates everything, at the end   of the day, while making veiled allusions to the present state of   the world. And he even makes a prophetic appeal to Europe to have   it consider this fateful moment, this turning point in the course   of history. The poem ends with these words: “Great age, here we   are. Take measure of the heart of man”.
It is, then, correct to say that Saint-John Perse, behind an   apparent abstruseness and symbols frequently difficult to grasp,   brings a universal message to his contemporaries. One has every   reason to add that in his own way he perpetuates a majestic   tradition in French poetic art, especially the rhetorical   tradition inherited from the classics. In short, this honour   awarded to him only confirms the position he has acquired in   letters as one of the great leaders in poetry.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
