Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1962
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 1962
Nobel Prize in Literature 1962
John Steinbeck
- John Steinbeck
Swedish Academy
John Steinbeck, the author awarded this   year’s Nobel Prize in Literature, was born in the little town of   Salinas, California, a few miles from the Pacific coast near the   fertile Salinas Valley. This locality forms the background for   many of his descriptions of the common man’s everyday life. He   was raised in moderate circumstances, yet he was on equal terms   with the workers’ families in this rather diversified area. While   studying at Stanford University, he often had to earn his living   by working on the ranches. He left Stanford without graduating   and, in 1925, went to New York as a freelance writer. After   bitter years of struggling to exist, he returned to California,   where he found a home in a lonely cottage by the sea. There he   continued his writing.
Although he had already written several books by 1935, he   achieved his first popular success in that year with
Tortilla   Flat.
He offered his readers spicy and comic tales about a   gang of
paisanos
, asocial individuals who, in their wild   revels, are almost caricatures of King Arthur’s Knights of the   Round Table. It has been said that in the United States this book   came as a welcome antidote to the gloom of the then prevailing   depression. The laugh was now on Steinbeck’s side.
But he had no mind to be an unoffending comforter and   entertainer. The topics he chose were serious and denunciatory,   as for example the bitter strikes on California’s fruit and   cotton plantations which he depicted in his novel
In Dubious   Battle
(1936). The power of his literary style increased   steadily during these years. The little masterpiece
Of Mice   and Men
(1937), which is the story of Lennie, the imbecile   giant who, out of tenderness, alone squeezes the life out of   every living creature that comes into his hands, was followed by   those incomparable short stories which he collected in the volume
The Long Valley
(1938). The way had now been paved for the   great work that is principally associated with Steinbeck’s name,   the epic chronicle
The Grapes of Wrath
(1939). This is the   story of the emigration to California which was forced upon a   group of people from Oklahoma through unemployment and abuse of   power. This tragic episode in the social history of the United   States inspired in Steinbeck a poignant description of the   experiences of one particular farmer and his family during their   endless, heartbreaking journey to a new home.
In this brief presentation it is not possible to dwell at any   length on individual works which Steinbeck later produced. If at   times the critics have seemed to note certain signs of flagging   powers, of repetitions that might point to a decrease in   vitality, Steinbeck belied their fears most emphatically with
The Winter of Our Discontent
(1961), a novel published   last year. Here he attained the same standard which he set in
The Grapes of Wrath
. Again he holds his position as an   independent expounder of the truth with an unbiased instinct for   what is genuinely American, be it good or bad.
In this recent novel, the central figure is the head of a family   who has come down in the world. After serving in the war, he   fails at whatever he tries until at last he is employed in the   simple work of a grocery store clerk in the New England town of   his forefathers. He is an honest man and he does not complain   without due cause, although he is constantly exposed to   temptation when he sees the means by which material success must   be purchased. However, such means require both hard   scrupulousness and moral obduracy, qualities he cannot muster   without risking his personal integrity. Tellingly displayed in   his sensitive conscience, irradiated like a prism, is a whole   body of questions which bear on the nation’s welfare problems.   This is done without any theorizing, using concrete, or even   trivial, everyday situation, which are nonetheless convincing   when described with all of Steinbeck’s vigorous and realistic   verve. Even with his insistence on the factual, there are   harmonic tones of daydreaming, fumbling speculations around the   eternal theme of life and death.
Steinbeck’s latest book is an account of his experiences during a   three-month tour of forty American states
Travels with   Charley,
(1962). He travelled in a small truck equipped with   a cabin where he slept and kept his stores. He travelled   incognito, his only companion being a black poodle. We see here   what a very experienced observer and
raisonneur
he is. In   a series of admirable explorations into local colour, he   rediscovers his country and its people. In its informal way this   book is also a forceful criticism of society. The traveller in   Rosinante – the name which he gave his truck – shows a slight   tendency to praise the old at the expense of the new, even though   it is quite obvious that he is on guard against the temptation.   “I wonder why progress so often looks like destruction”, he says   in one place when he sees the bulldozers flattening out the   verdant forest of Seattle to make room for the feverishly   expanding residential areas and the skyscrapers. It is, in any   case, a most topical reflection, valid also outside   America.
Among the masters of modern American literature who have already   been awarded this Prize – from
Sinclair Lewis
to
Ernest Hemingway
– Steinbeck more than   holds his own, independent in position and achievement. There is   in him a strain of grim humour which, to some extent, redeems his   often cruel and crude motif. His sympathies always go out to the   oppressed, to the misfits and the distressed; he likes to   contrast the simple joy of life with the brutal and cynical   craving for money. But in him we find the American temperament   also in his great feeling for nature, for the tilled soil, the   wasteland, the mountains, and the ocean coasts, all an   inexhaustible source of inspiration to Steinbeck in the midst of,   and beyond, the world of human beings.
The Swedish Academy’s reason for awarding the prize to John   Steinbeck reads, “for his realistic as well as imaginative   writings, distinguished by a sympathetic humour and a keen social   perception.”
Dear Mr. Steinbeck – You are not a stranger to the Swedish public   any more than to that of your own country and of the whole world.   With your most distinctive works you have become a teacher of   good will and charity, a defender of human values, which can well   be said to correspond to the proper idea of the Nobel Prize. In   expressing the congratulations of the Swedish Academy, I now ask   you to receive this year’s Nobel Prize in Literature from the   hands of His Majesty, the King.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
