Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1963
Nobel Prize in Literature 1963
Giorgos Seferis
- Giorgos Seferis
Swedish Academy
This year’s Nobel Prize in Literature has   been awarded to the Greek poet Giorgos Seferis, who was born in   1900 at Smyrna, which he left at an early age to accompany his   family to Athens. After the Greeks were driven out of Asia Minor,   and Seferis’s home town had gone up in flames, homelessness –   ever the fate of an oppressed and scattered people – was to play   a decisive role during his adult years in more ways than one.   Seferis studied in Paris, then entered the diplomatic service,   went into exile with the Free Greek Government when Greece was   occupied in 1941, and was moved about from country to country   during the Second World War, when he served his country in Crete,   in Cairo, in South Africa, in Turkey, and in the Middle East.   After six years as ambassador in London, he retired last year and   returned to Athens to devote himself entirely to his literary   work.
Seferis’s poetic production is not large, but because of the   uniqueness of its thought and style and the beauty of its   language, it has become a lasting symbol of all that is   indestructible in the Hellenic affirmation of life. Now that   Palamas and Sikelianos are dead, Seferis is today the   representative Hellenic poet, carrying on the classical heritage;   a leading national figure, he is also acclaimed abroad in so far   as his poetry has been made available in translation. Here in   Sweden his work was presented thirteen years ago by Hjalmar   Gullberg, whose translations included the famous
The King of   Asine,
the theme of which has a connection with Sweden   because of our archaeologists’ successful excavations on this   site. Using imagination as a tool, Seferis tries in this poem to   penetrate the secret behind a name that is merely mentioned in a   verse of the Iliad.
When reading Seferis we are forcibly reminded of a fact that is   sometimes forgotten: geographically, Greece is not only a   peninsula but also a world of water and foam, strewn with myriad   islands, an ancient sea kingdom, the perilous and stormy home of   the mariner. This Greece is the constant background of his   poetry, in which it is conjured up as the vision of a grandeur   both harsh and tender. Seferis does this with a language of rare   subtlety, both rhythmical and metaphorical. It has rightly been   said that he, better than anyone else, has interpreted the   mystery of the stones, of the dead fragments of marble, and of   the silent, smiling statues. In his evocative poems, figures from   ancient Greek mythology appear together with recent events in the   Mediterranean’s bloody theatre of war. His poetry sometimes seems   difficult to interpret, particularly because Seferis is reluctant   to expose his inner self, preferring to hide behind a mask of   anonymity. He often expresses his grief and bitterness through   the medium of a central narrative figure, a kind of Odysseus with   features borrowed from the old seamen in the lost Smyrna of the   poet’s youth. But in his hollow voice is dramatized much of   Greece’s historical fatality, its shipwrecks and its rescues, its   disasters and its valour. Technically, Seferis has received vital   impulses from
T. S. Eliot
, but   underneath the tone is unmistakably his own, often carrying a   broken echo of the music from an ancient Greek chorus.
Seferis once described himself, “I am a monotonous and obstinate   man who, for twenty years, has not ceased to say the same things   over and over again.” There is perhaps some truth in this   description, but one must remember that the message he feels   bound to convey is inseparable from the intellectual life of his   generation as it finds itself confronted with ancient Greek   civilization, a heritage that presents a formidable challenge to   the impoverished heir. In one of his most significant poems   Seferis describes a dream in which a marble head – too heavy for   his arms, yet impossible to push aside – fell upon him at the   moment of awakening. It is in this state of mind that he sings   the praise of the dead, for only communication with the dead   conversing on their asphodel meadows can bring to the living a   hope of peace, confidence, and justice. In Seferis’s   interpretation the story of the Argonauts becomes a parable   halfway between myth and history, a parable of oarsmen who must   fail before they reach their goal.
But Seferis animates this background of melancholy resignation   with the eloquent joy inspired in him by his country’s   mountainous islands with their whitewashed houses rising in   terraces above an azure sea, a harmony of colours that we find   again in the Greek flag. In concluding this brief presentation, I   should like to add that the prize has been awarded to Seferis   “for his eminent lyrical writing, inspired by a deep feeling for   the Hellenic world of culture.”
Dear Sir – In honouring you, it has been a great privilege for   the Swedish Academy to pay its tribute to the Greece of today,   whose rich literature has had to wait, perhaps too long, for the   Nobel laurels. Extending to you the congratulations of the   Swedish Academy, I ask you to receive from the hands of His   Majesty, the King, this year’s Prize in Literature.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
