Enhanced Page Navigation
Nobel Prize in Literature 1964 - Press release
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1964
Nobel Prize in Literature 1964
Jean-Paul Sartre
Announcement
Announcement
- Jean-Paul Sartre
Announcement
Address by Anders Österling, Member of the
Swedish   Academy
This year the Nobel Prize in Literature has   been granted by the Swedish Academy to the French writer   Jean-Paul Sartre for his work which, rich in ideas and filled   with the spirit of freedom and the quest for truth, has exerted a   far-reaching influence on our age.
It will be recalled that the laureate has made it known that he   did not wish to accept the prize. The fact that he has declined   this distinction does not in the least modify the validity of the   award. Under the circumstances, however, the Academy can only   state that the presentation of the prize cannot take place.
Refusal
In a public announcement, printed in
Le   Figaro
of October 23, 1964, Mr. Sartre expressed his regret   that his refusal of the prize had given rise to scandal, and   wished it to be known that, unaware of the irrevocability of the   Swedish Academy’s decisions, he had sought by letter to prevent   their choice falling upon him. In this letter, he specified that   his refusal was not meant to slight the Swedish Academy but was   rather based on personal and objective reasons of his own.
As to personal reasons, Mr. Sartre pointed out that due to his   conception of the writer’s task he had always declined official   honours and thus his present act was not unprecedented. He had   similarly refused membership in the Legion of Honour and had not   desired to enter the Collège de France, and he would refuse   the Lenin Prize if it were offered to him. He stated that a   writer’s accepting such an honour would be to associate his   personal commitments with the awarding institution, and that,   above all, a writer should not allow himself to be turned into an   institution.
Among his objective reasons, Mr. Sartre listed his belief that   interchange between East and West must take place between men and   between cultures without the intervention of institutions.   Furthermore, since the conferment of past prizes did not, in his   opinion, represent equally writers of all ideologies and nations,   he felt that his acceptance might be undesirably and unjustly   interpreted.
Mr. Sartre closed his remarks with a message of affection for the   Swedish public.
At the banquet, S. Friberg, Rector of the
Caroline   Institute
, made the following remarks: “Mr. Sartre found   himself unable to accept this year’s Prize in Literature. There   is always discussion about this prize, which every one considers   himself capable of judging, or which he does not understand and   consequently criticizes. But I believe that Nobel would have had   a great understanding of this year’s choice. The betterment of   the world is the dream of every generation, and this applies   particularly to the true poet and scientist. This was Nobel’s   dream. This is one measure of the scientist’s significance. And   this is the source and strength of Sartre’s inspiration. As an   author and philosopher, Sartre has been a central figure in   postwar literary and intellectual discussion – admired, debated,   criticized. His explosive production, in its entirety, has the   impress of a message; it has been sustained by a profoundly   serious endeavour to improve the reader, the world at large. The   philosophy, which his writings have served, has been hailed by   youth as a liberation. Sartre’s existentialism may be understood   in the sense that the degree of happiness which an individual can   hope to attain is governed by his willingness to take his stand   in accordance with his ethos and to accept the consequences   thereof; this is a more austere interpretation of a philosophy   admirably expressed by Nobel’s contemporary, Ralph Waldo Emerson:   ‘Nothing is at last sacred but the integrity of your own   mind.'”
The quality of human life depends not only on external conditions   but also on individual happiness. In our age of standardization   and complex social systems, awareness of the meaning of life for   the individual has perhaps not been lost, but it has certainly   been dulled; and it is as urgent for us today as it was in   Nobel’s time to uphold the ideals which were his.”
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
