Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1965 - Award ceremony speech
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1965
Nobel Prize in Literature 1965
Mikhail Sholokhov
- Mikhail Sholokhov
Swedish   Academy
This year’s Nobel Prize for Literature has,   as you all know, been awarded to the Russian writer Mikhail   Sholokhov, born in 1905, and now in his sixty-first year.   Sholokhov’s childhood was spent in the country of the Don   Cossacks; and the strong ties that have always bound him to this   district grew out of his sympathy for the highly individual   temperament of its people and the wildness of its landscape. He   saw his native province pass through the various phases of the   revolution and the Russian civil war. After he had tried his hand   at manual work in Moscow for a while, he soon began to   concentrate on writing and produced a series of sketches   describing the battles along the Don, a genre that was later to   bring him fame. It is striking evidence of the precociousness of   the war generation that Sholokhov was only 21 when he set to work   on the first parts of the great epic novel,
And Quiet Flows   the Don
. Its Russian title is simply,
The Quiet Don
,   which acquires an undeniably ironic undertone in view of the   extreme violence of the action in Sholokhov’s masterpiece.
It took Sholokhov 14 years to complete the project, a highly   exacting one in every way, covering as it does the period   including the First World War, the Revolution and the Civil War,   and, having as its main theme, the tragic Cossack revolt. The   four parts of the epic appeared at relatively long intervals   between 1928 and 1940, and were long viewed with some concern by   the Soviet critics, whose political affiliation made it difficult   for them to accept, wholeheartedly, Sholokhov’s quite natural   commitment to his theme, that of the Cossacks’ revolt against the   new central authorities; nor could they easily accept his   endeavour to explain and defend objectively the defiant spirit of   independence that drove these people to resist every attempt at   subjection.
In view of the controversial aspects of his theme there can   surely be no doubt that in starting out upon the writing of this   novel Sholokhov was taking a daring step, a step which, at that   point in his career, also meant the settling of a conflict with   his own conscience.
And Quiet Flows the Don
is so well known to Swedish   readers that an introduction may well seem superfluous. With   magnificent realism the book portrays the unique character of the   Cossack, the traditional mixture of cavalryman and farmer, with   instincts that seem to conflict with one another but which   nevertheless allow themselves to be welded together to form a   firmly co-ordinated whole. There is no glamorization. The coarse   and savage streaks in the Cossack temperament are displayed   openly; nothing is hidden or glossed over, but, at the same time,   one is aware of an undercurrent of respect for all that is human.   Although a convinced Communist, Sholokhov keeps ideological   comment out of his book completely and we are compensated for the   amount of blood shed in the battles he describes by the   full-blooded vigour of his narrative.
The Cossack’s son, Gregor, who goes over from the Reds to the   Whites and is forced against his will to continue the struggle to   its hopeless conclusion is both hero and victim. The conception   of honour that he has inherited is put to the sternest of tests,   and he is defeated by a necessity of history which here plays the   same role as the classical Nemesis. But our sympathy goes out to   him and to the two unforgettable women, Natalja, his wife, and   Aksinia, his mistress, who both meet disaster for his sake. When   he finally returns to his native village, after digging Aksinia’s   grave with his sabre out on the steppe, he is a grey-haired man   who has lost everything in life but his young son.
Stretching away behind the whole gallery of figures, seen either   in their personal relationships or playing their parts as   military personnel, lies the mighty landscape of the Ukraine, the   steppes in all the changing seasons, the villages with their   sweet-smelling pastures and grazing horses, the grass billowing   in the wind, the banks of the river and the never-ending murmur   of the river itself. Sholokhov never tires of describing the   Russian steppes. Sometimes he breaks off the narrative right in   the middle of his story to burst out in exultation:
“My beloved steppes under the low sky of the Don country! Ravines   winding across the plain with their walls of red earth, a sea of   waving feather-grass, marked only by the print of horses’ hoofs   leaving trail like a myriad birds’ nests, and by the graves of   the Tartars who in wise silence watch over the buried glory of   the Cossacks… I bow low before you, and, as a son, kiss your   fresh earth, unspoiled steppe of the Don Cossacks, watered with   blood.”
It may well be said that Sholokhov is using a well-tried   realistic technique, breaking no new ground, a technique that may   seem naive in its simplicity if we set it beside that offered us   in many a later model in the art of novel-writing. But his   subject surely could not have been presented in any other way,   and the powerful, evenly-sustained, epic flow of the writing   makes
And Quiet Flows the Don
a genuine
roman   fleuve
in two senses.
Sholokhov’s more recent work, for example,
Podnyataya   tselina
, 1932 and 1959 (Virgin Soil Upturned) – a novel   describing compulsory collectivization and the introduction of
kolkhozy
– has a vitality that never flags and shows us   Sholokhov’s fondness for characters that are richly comic but at   the same time observed with a sympathetic eye. But, of course,
And Quiet Flows the Don
would, on its own, thoroughly   merit the present award, a distinction which, it is true, has   come rather late in the day, but happily not too late to add to   the roll of Nobel prize-winners the name of one of the most   outstanding writers of our time.
In support of its choice the Swedish Academy speaks of “the   artistic power and integrity with which, in his epic of the Don,   Sholokhov has given expression to a historic phase in the life of   the Russian people”.
Sir – this distinction is intended as a tribute of justice and   gratitude to you for your important contribution to modern   Russian literature, a contribution as well-known in this country   as it is all over the world. May I offer you the congratulations   of the Swedish Academy, and at the same time, ask you to receive   from His Majesty, the King, this year’s Nobel Prize in   Literature.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
