Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1966
Nobel Prize in Literature 1966
Shmuel Agnon
Nelly Sachs
- Shmuel Agnon
- Nelly Sachs
Swedish   Academy
This year’s Nobel Prize in Literature has   been awarded to two outstanding Jewish authors – Shmuel Yosef   Agnon and Nelly Sachs – each of whom represents Israel’s message   to our time. Agnon’s home is in Jerusalem, and Miss Sachs has   been an immigrant in Sweden since 1940, and is now a Swedish   subject. The purpose of combining these two prizewinners is to do   justice to the individual achievements of each, and the sharing   of the prize has its special justification: to honour two writers   who, although they write in different languages, are united in a   spiritual kinship and complement each other in a superb effort to   present the cultural heritage of the Jewish people through the   written word. Their common source of inspiration has been, for   both of them, a vital power.
I
Shmuel Agnon’s reputation as the foremost   writer in modern Hebrew literature has gradually penetrated   linguistic barriers which, in this case, are particularly   obstructive. His most important works are now available in   Swedish under the title
I havets mitt
(In the Heart of the   Seas). Agnon, now seventy-eight years old, began writing in   Yiddish but soon changed to Hebrew, which, according to experts,   he handles with absolute mastery, in a taut and sonorous prose   style of extraordinary expressiveness. He was only twenty when he   left his native town in East Galicia, where, as the scion of an   old and respected family, he had been brought up in a scholarly   tradition. He felt drawn to Palestine, where now, as an aged   classical author, he can look back on the long struggle for   national reestablishment, and where the so-called cultural   Zionism possesses in him one of its finest creative   champions.
Agnon’s unique quality as a writer is apparent chiefly in the   great cycle of novels set in his native town of Buczacz, once a   flourishing centre of Jewish piety and rabbinical learning, now   in ruins. Reality and legend stand side by side in his narrative   art.
Hakhnasat Kalah
, 1922 (The Bridal Canopy), is one of   his most characteristic stories, in its ingenious and earthy   humour, a Jewish counterpart to
Don Quixote
and
Till   Eulenspiegel
. But, perhaps, his greatest achievement is his   novel
Oreach Nata Lalun
, 1939 (A Guest for the Night),   which tells of a visit to Buczacz, the war-ruined city of his   childhood, and of the narrator’s vain attempts to assemble the   congregation for a service in the synagogue. Within the framework   of a local chronicle we see a wonderful portrayal of destinies   and figures, of experience and meditation. The lost key to the   prayer house, which the traveller finds in his knapsack only   after his return to Jerusalem, is, for Agnon, a symbolic hint   that the old order can never be rebuilt in the Diaspora, but only   under the protection of Zionism. Agnon is a realist, but there is   always a mystical admixture which lends to even the greyest and   most ordinary scenes a golden atmosphere of strange fairy-tale   poetry, often reminiscent of Chagall’s motifs from the world of   the Old Testament. He stands out as a highly original writer,   endowed with remarkable gifts of humour and wisdom, and with a   perspicacious play of thought combined with naive perception – in   all, a consummate expression of the Jewish character.
II
Nelly Sachs, like so many other   German-Jewish writers, suffered the fate of exile. Through   Swedish intervention she was saved from persecution and the   threat of deportation and was brought to this country. She has   since then worked in peace as a refugee on Swedish soil,   attaining the maturity and authority that are now confirmed by   the Nobel Prize. In recent years she has been acclaimed in the   German world as a writer of convincing worth and irresistible   sincerity. With moving intensity of feeling she has given voice   to the worldwide tragedy of the Jewish people, which she has   expressed in lyrical laments of painful beauty and in dramatic   legends. Her symbolic language boldly combines an inspired modern   idiom with echoes of ancient biblical poetry. Identifying herself   totally with the faith and ritual mysticism of her people, Miss   Sachs has created a world of imagery which does not shun the   terrible truth of the extermination camps and the corpse   factories, but which, at the same time, rises above all hatred of   the persecutors, merely revealing a genuine sorrow at man’s   debasement. Her purely lyrical production is now collected under   the title
Fahrtins Staublose
, 1961 (Journey to the   Beyond), which comprises six interconnected works written during   a twenty-year creative period of increasing concentration. There   is also a series of dramatic poems, equally remarkable in their   way, under the joint title
Zeichen im Sand
, 1961 (Signs in   the Sand), the themes of which might have been taken from the   dark treasure house of Hassidic mysticism, but which, here, have   taken on new vigour and vital meaning. Let it suffice here to   mention the mystery play
Eli
(1950) about an   eight-year-old boy who is beaten to death by a German soldier in   Poland when he blows on his shepherd’s pipe to call on heaven’s   help when his parents are taken away. The visionary cobbler   Michael manages to trace the culprit to the next village. The   soldier has been seized by remorse and, at the encounter in the   forest, he collapses without Michael’s having to raise his hand   against him. This ending denotes a divine justice which has   nothing to do with earthly retribution.
Nelly Sachs’s writing is today the most intense artistic   expression of the reaction of the Jewish spirit to suffering, and   thus it can indeed be said to fulfill the humane purpose   underlying Alfred Nobel’s will.
Doctor Agnon – according to the wording of the diploma, this   year’s Nobel Prize in Literature has been awarded to you for your   “profoundly distinctive narrative art with motifs from the life   of the Jewish people”. We should be happy if you would consider   this international distinction as a sign that your writing need   not be isolated within the boundary of its language, and that it   has proved to have the power to reach out beyond all confining   walls, and to arouse mankind’s sympathy, understanding, and   respect. Through me, the Swedish Academy conveys its sincere   congratulations, and I now ask you to receive the Prize from the   hands of His Majesty, the King.
Miss Nelly Sachs – you have lived a long time in our country,   first as an obscure stranger and then as an honoured guest. Today   the Swedish Academy honours your “outstanding lyrical and   dramatic writings, which interpret Israel’s destiny with touching   strength”. On an occasion like this it is natural also to recall   the invaluable interest you have shown in Swedish literature, a   token of friendship which, in turn, has found a response in the   desire of our Swedish writers to translate your work. Offering   you the congratulations of the Swedish Academy, I ask you now to   receive this year’s Nobel Prize in Literature from the hands of   His Majesty, the King.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
