Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1967
Nobel Prize in Literature 1967
Miguel Angel Asturias
- Miguel Angel Asturias
Swedish   Academy
This year the Nobel Prize in Literature has   been awarded to the Guatemalan writer Miguel Angel Asturias, a   prominent representative of the modern literature of Latin   America, in which such interesting developments are now taking   place. Born in 1899 in the capital of Guatemala, Asturias became   imbued, even as a child, with the characteristically Guatemalan   love of nature and of the mythical world. He devoted to this   native heritage, and to its libertarian spirit, a fervour which   was to dominate his whole literary production. After studying law   and folklore, he lived in France during the twenties, and, for a   time, represented his country in the diplomatic service. He   condemned himself to a long exile after the anti-democratic coup   d’etat of 1954, but returned when the legitimate regime took   office again. He is presently the Guatemalan Ambassador in   Paris.
During the last few years, Asturias has gained international   recognition, as his most important works came to be translated   into various languages; today they can be read even in Swedish.   His first work was a collection of Guatemalan legends, strange   evocations of the Mayas’ past, a treasure of images and symbols   which has, ever since, been the inexhaustible source of his   inspiration. But he did not get his real start as a writer until   1946, the year of the publication of the novel,
El Señor   Presidente
(The President). This magnificent and tragic   satire criticizes the prototype of the Latin American dictator   who appeared in several places at the beginning of the century   and has since reappeared, his existence being fostered by the   mechanism of tyranny which, for the common man, makes every day a   hell on earth. The passionate vigour with which Asturias evokes   the terror and distrust which poisoned the social atmosphere of   the time makes his work a challenge and an invaluable aesthetic   gesture. The narrative, entitled,
Hombres de maíz
(Men of Maize) appeared three years later. It might be considered   as a folktale whose chief inspiration is in the imagination but   which, nevertheless, remains true to life. Its motifs are from   the mythology of that tropical land where man must struggle   simultaneously against a mysteriously beautiful but hostile   nature and against unbearable social distortions, oppression, and   tyranny. Such an accumulation of nightmares and totemic phantasms   may overwhelm our sensibilities, but we cannot help being   fascinated by a poetry so bizarre and terrifying.
With the trilogy of novels begun in 1950 –
Viente Fuerte
,   1950 (Strong Wind),
El Papa verde
, 1954 (The Green Pope),   and
Los ojos de los enterrados,
1960 (The Eyes of the   Buried) – a new topical concern appears in Asturias’s epic work:   the theme of the struggle against the domination of American   trusts, epitomized by the United Fruit Company, and its political   and economic effects upon the contemporary history of the “Banana   Republic”. Here, again, we see the violent effervescence and the   visionary vehemence which stem from the author’s intense   involvement in the situation of his country.
Asturias has completely freed himself from obsolete narrative   techniques. Very early, he came under the influence of the new   tendencies appearing in European literature; his explosive style   bears a close kinship to French surrealism. It must be noted,   however, that he always takes his inspiration from real life. In   his impressive cycle of poems entitled
Clarivigilia   primaveral
, 1965 (Bright and Awake in Spring), on which a   Swedish critical study has just appeared, Asturias deals with the   very genesis of the arts and of poetic creation, in a language   which seems to have assumed the bright splendour of the magical   quetzal’s feathers and the glimmering of phosphorescent   insects.
Latin America today can boast an active group of prominent   writers, a multivoiced chorus in which individual contributions   are not readily discernible. Asturias’s work is nevertheless   vast, bold, and outstanding enough to arouse interest outside of   his own literary milieu, beyond a geographically limited area   situated far away from us. One of the Indian legends Asturias   alludes to evokes the belief that dead ancestors are forced to   witness, with open eyes, the struggles and sufferings of their   offspring. Only when justice is re-established, and the stolen   soil restituted, will the dead finally be able to close their   eyes and sleep peacefully in their tombs. It is a beautiful and   poignant popular belief, and we can easily imagine that the   militant poet has often felt upon him the gaze of his ancestors   and has often heard the silent, symbolic appeal reaching to his   heart.
Mr. Ambassador – you come from a distant country, but do not let   this fact make you feel today that you are a stranger among us.   Your work is known and appreciated in Sweden. We take pleasure in   welcoming you as a messenger from Latin America, its people, its   spirit, and its future. I congratulate you in the name of the   Swedish Academy, which pays tribute to the “vividness of your   literary work, rooted in national traits and Indian traditions”.   I now invite you to receive your Prize from His Majesty, the   King.
From
, Literature 1901-1967
, Editor Horst Frenz, Elsevier Publishing Company, Amsterdam, 1969
