Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1968
Nobel Prize in Literature 1968
Yasunari Kawabata
- Yasunari Kawabata
Swedish   Academy
(Translation)
The recipient of this year’s Nobel Prize   for Literature, the Japanese Yasunari Kawabata, was born in 1899   in the big industrial town of Osaka, where his father was a   highly-cultured doctor with literary interests. At an early age,   however, he was deprived of this favourable growing-up   environment on the sudden death of his parents, and, as an only   child, was sent to his blind and ailing grandfather in a remote   part of the country. These tragic losses, doubly significant in   view of the Japanese people’s intense feeling for blood ties,   have undoubtedly affected Kawabata’s whole outlook on life and   has been one of the reasons for his later study of Buddhist   philosophy.
As a student at the imperial university in Tokyo, he decided   early on a writing career, and he is an example of the kind of   restless absorption that is always a condition of the literary   calling. In a youthful short story, which first drew attention to   him at the age of twenty-seven, he tells of a student who, during   lonely autumn walks on the peninsula of Izu, comes across a poor,   despised dancing girl, with whom he has a touching love affair;   she opens her pure heart and shows the young man a way to deep   and genuine feeling. Like a sad refrain in a folksong the theme   recurs with many variations in his following works; he presents   his own scale of values, and with the years, he has won renown   far beyond the borders of Japan. True, of his production only   three novels and a few short stories have so far been translated   into different languages, evidently because translation in this   case offers especially great difficulties and is apt to be far   too coarse a filter, in which many finer shades of meaning in his   richly expressive language must be lost. But the translated works   do give us a sufficiently representative picture of his   personality.
In common with his older countryman, Tanizaki, now deceased, he   has admittedly been influenced by modern western realism, but, at   the same time, he has, with greater fidelity, retained his   footing in Japan’s classical literature and therefore represents   a clear tendency to cherish and preserve a genuinely national   tradition of style. In Kawabata’s narrative art it is still   possible to find a sensitively shaded situation poetry which   traces its origin back to Murasaki’s vast canvas of life and   manners in Japan about the year 1000.
Kawabata has been especially praised as a subtle psychologist of   women. He has shown his mastery as such in the two short novels,   “The Snow Kingdom” and “A Thousand Cranes”
,
to use the   Swedish titles. In these we see a brilliant capacity to   illuminate the erotic episode, an exquisite keenness of   observation, a whole network of small, mysterious values, which   often put the European narrative technique in the shade.   Kawabata’s writing is reminiscent of Japanese painting; he is a   worshipper of the fragile beauty and melancholy picture language   of existence in the life of nature and in man’s destiny. If the   transience of all outward action can be likened to drifting tufts   of grass on the surface of the water, then it is the genuinely   Japanese miniature art of haiku poetry which is reflected in   Kawabata’s prose style.
Even if we feel excluded, as it were, from his writing by a root   system, more or less foreign to us, of ancient Japanese ideas and   instincts, we may find it tempting in Kawabata to notice certain   similarities of temperament with European writers from our own   time. Turgeniev is the first to spring to mind, he, too, is a   deeply sensitive storyteller and a broadminded painter of the   social scene, with pessimistically coloured sympathies within a   time of transition between old and new.
Kawabata’s most recent work is also his most outstanding, the   novel, “The Old Capital”
,
completed six years ago, and now   available in Swedish translation. The story is about the young   girl, Chiëko, a foundling exposed by her poverty-stricken   parents and adopted into the house of the merchant Takichiro,   where she is brought up according to old Japanese principles. She   is a sensitive, loyal being, who, only in secret, broods on the   riddle of her origin. Popular Japanese belief has it that an   exposed child is afflicted with a lifelong curse, in addition to   which the condition of being a twin, according to the strange   Japanese viewpoint, bears the stigma of shame. One day it happens   that she meets a pretty young working girl from a cedar forest   near the city and finds that she is her twin sister. They are   intimately united beyond the social pale of class – the robust,   work-hardened Naëko, and the delicate, anxiously guarded   Chiëko, but their bewildering likeness soon gives rise to   complications and confusion. The whole story is set against the   background of the religious festival year in Kyoto from the   cherry-blossom spring to the snow-glittering winter.
The city itself is really the leading character, the capital of   the old kingdom, once the seat of the mikado and his court, still   a romantic sanctuary after a thousand years, the home of the fine   arts and elegant handicraft, nowadays exploited by tourism but   still a loved place of pilgrimage. With its Shinto and Buddha   temples, its old artisan quarters and botanical gardens, the   place possesses a poetry which Kawabata expresses in a tender,   courteous manner, with no sentimental overtones, but, naturally,   as a moving appeal. He has experienced his country’s crushing   defeat and no doubt realizes what the future demands in the way   of industrial go-ahead spirit, tempo and vitality. But in the   postwar wave of violent Americanization, his novel is a gentle   reminder of the necessity of trying to save something of the old   Japan’s beauty and individuality for the new. He describes the   religious ceremonies in Kyoto with the same meticulous care as he   does the textile trade’s choice of patterns in the traditional   sashes belonging to the women’s dresses. These aspects of the   novel may have their documentary worth, but the reader prefers to   dwell on such a deeply characteristic passage as when the party   of middle-class people from the city visits the botanical garden   – which has been closed for a long time because the American   occupation troops have had their barracks there – in order to see   whether the lovely avenue of camphor trees is still intact and   able to delight the connoisseur’s eye.
With Kawabata, Japan enters the circle of literary Nobel   Prize-winners for the first time. Essential to the forming of the   decision is the fact that, as a writer, he imparts a   moral-esthetic cultural awareness with unique artistry, thereby,   in his way, contributing to the spiritual bridge-building between   East and West.
Mr Kawabata,
The citation speaks of your narrative mastery, which, with great   sensibility, expresses the essence of the Japanese mind. With   great satisfaction we greet you here in our midst today, an   honoured guest from afar, on this platform. On behalf of the   Swedish Academy, I beg to express our hearty congratulations,   and, at the same time, ask you now to receive this year’s Nobel   Prize for Literature from the hands of His Majesty, the King.
From
Les Prix Nobel
en 1968
, Editor Wilhelm Odelberg, [Nobel Foundation], Stockholm, 1969
