Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1969
Nobel Prize in Literature 1969
Samuel Beckett
- Samuel Beckett
Swedish Academy
(Translation)
Your Majesty, Your Royal Highnesses, Ladies   and Gentlemen,
Mix a powerful imagination with a logic in absurdum, and the   result will be either a paradox or an Irishman. If it is an   Irishman, you will get the paradox into the bargain. Even the   Nobel Prize in Literature is sometimes divided. Paradoxically,   this has happened in 1969, a single award being addressed to one   man, two languages and a third nation, itself divided.
Samuel Beckett was born near Dublin in 1906. As a renowned author   he entered the world almost half a century later in Paris when,   in the space of three years, five works were published that   immediately brought him into the centre of interest: the novel
Molloy
in 1951; its sequel,
Malone Meurt
, in the   same year; the play,
En Attendant Godot
in 1952; and in   the following year the two novels,
L’lnnommable
, which   concluded the cycle about
Molloy
and
Malone
, and
Watt.
These dates simply record a sudden appearance. The five works   were not new at the time of publication, nor were they written in   the order in which they appeared. They had their background in   the current situation as well as in Beckett’s previous   development. The true nature of
Murphy
, a novel from   1938, and the studies of Joyce   (1929) and Proust (1931), which illuminate his own   initial position, is perhaps most clearly seen in the light of   Beckett’s subsequent production. For while he has pioneered new   modes of expression in fiction and on the stage, Beckett is also   allied to tradition, being closely linked not only to Joyce and   Proust but to Kafka as well, and the dramatic works from his   debut have a heritage from French works of the 1890s and Alfred   Jarry’s
Ubu Roi.
In several respects, the novel
Watt
marks a change of   phase in this remarkable output. Written in 1942-44 in the South   of France – whence Beckett fled from the Nazis, having lived for   a long time in Paris – it was to be his last work in English for   many years; he made his name in French and did not return to his   native tongue for about fifteen years. The world around had also   changed when Beckett came to write again after
Watt.
All   the other works which made his name were written in the period   1945-49. The Second World War is their foundation; it was after   this that his authorship achieved maturity and a message. But   these works are not about the war itself, about life at the   front, or in the French resistance movement (in which Beckett   took an active part), but about what happened afterwards, when   peace came and the curtain was rent from the unholiest of   unholies to reveal the terrifying spectacle of the lengths to   which man can go in inhuman degradation – whether ordered or   driven by himself – and how much of such degradation man can   survive. In this sense the degradation of humanity is a recurrent   theme in Beckett’s writing and to this extent, his philosophy,   simply accentuated by elements of the grotesque and of tragic   farce, can be described as a negativism that cannot desist from   descending to the depths. To the depths it must go because it is   only there that pessimistic thought and poetry can work their   miracles. What does one get when a negative is printed? A   positive, a clarification, with black proving to be the light of   day, the parts in deepest shade those which reflect the light   source. Its name is fellow-feeling, charity. There are precedents   besides the accumulation of abominations in Greek tragedy which   led Aristotle to the doctrine of catharsis, purification through   horror. Mankind has drawn more strength from Schopenhauer’s   bitter well than from Schelling’s beatific springs, has been more   blessed by Pascal’s agonized doubt than by Leibniz’s blind   rational trust in the best of all possible worlds has reaped – in   the field of Irish literature, which has also fed Beckett’s   writing – a much leaner harvest from the whitewashed clerical   pastoral of Oliver Goldsmith than from Dean Swift’s vehement   denigration of all humankind.
Part of the essence of Beckett’s outlook is to be found here – in   the difference between an easily-acquired pessimism that rests   content with untroubled scepticism, and a pessimism that is   dearly bought and which penetrates to mankind’s utter   destitution. The former commences and concludes with the concept   that nothing is really of any value, the latter is based on   exactly the opposite outlook. For what is worthless cannot be   degraded. The perception of human degradation – which we have   witnessed, perhaps, to a greater extent than any previous   generation – is not possible if human values are denied. But the   experience becomes all the more painful as the recognition of   human dignity deepens. This is the source of inner cleansing, the   life force nevertheless, in Beckett’s pessimism. It houses a love   of mankind that grows in understanding as it plumbs further into   the depths of abhorrence, a despair that has to reach the utmost   bounds of suffering to discover that compassion has no bounds.   From that position, in the realms of annihilation, rises the   writing of Samuel Beckett like a miserere from all mankind, its   muffled minor key sounding liberation to the oppressed, and   comfort to those in need.
This seems to be stated most clearly in the two masterpieces,
Waiting for Godot
and
Happy Days
, each of which, in   a way, is a development of a biblical text. In the case of
Godot
we have, ‘Art thou he that should come, or do we   look for another?’ The two tramps are confronted with the   meaninglessness of existence at its most brutal. It may be a   human figure; no laws are as cruel as those of creation and man’s   peculiar status in creation comes from being the only creature to   apply these laws with deliberately evil intent. But if we   conceive of a providence – a source even of the immeasurable   suffering inflicted by, and on, mankind – what sort of almighty   is it that we – like the tramps – are to meet somewhere, some   day? Beckett’s answer consists of the title of the play. By the   end of the performance, as at the end of our own, we know nothing   about this
Godot.
At the final curtain we have no   intimation of the force whose progress we have witnessed. But we   do know one thing, of which all the horror of this experience   cannot deprive us: namely, our waiting. This is man’s   metaphysical predicament of perpetual, uncertain expectation,   captured with true poetic simplicity:
En attendant Godot,   Waiting for Godot.
The text for
Happy Days
– “a voice crying in the   wilderness” – is more concerned with the predicament of man on   earth, of our relationships with one another. In his exposition   Beckett has much to say about our capacity for entertaining   untroubled illusions in a wilderness void of hope. But this is   not the theme. The action simply concerns how isolation, how the   sand rises higher and higher until the individual is completely   buried in loneliness. Out of the suffocating silence, however,   there still rises the head, the voice crying in the wilderness,   man’s indomitable need to seek out his fellow men right to the   end, speak to his peers and find in companionship his solace.
L’Académie Suédoise regrette que   Samuel Beckett ne soit pas parmi nous aujourd’hui. Cependant il a   choisi pour le représenter l’homme qui le premier a   découvert l’importance de l’oeuvre maintenant   récompensée, son editeur a Paris, M. Jérôme   Lindon, et je vous prie, cher Monsieur, de vouloir bien recevoir   de la main de Sa Majesté le Roi le Prix Nobel de   littérature, décerné par l’Académie à   Samuel Beckett.
From
Les Prix Nobel
en 1969
, Editor Wilhelm Odelberg, [Nobel Foundation], Stockholm, 1970
