Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1970
Nobel Prize in Literature 1970
Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn
- Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn
Swedish   Academy
, on December 10, 1970
Your Majesty, Your Royal Highnesses, Ladies   and Gentlemen,
Our passports show where and when we were born, facts that are   needed to fix our identity. According to a current theory this   also applies to authorship. A literary work belongs to its time,   and its creator is a product of his social and political   situation. There are weighty examples to the contrary but these   must be jettisoned or the theory will founder. A case to which it   does apply, however, is this year’s Nobel Prizewinner in   Literature. It is worth emphasizing this because from all points   of the compass, not least the West, people are prone for various   reasons to make exceptions in his case.
Alexander Solzhenitsyn’s passport – I have in mind the one that   will convey him to posterity – tells us when and where he was   born, details that we need in order to establish his artistic   identity. Born in 1918 in Kislovodsk, he belongs to the first   generation of Soviet Russian writers who grew up with the new   form of government and he is indivisible from the climate and the   time in which he was born. Solzhenitsyn himself has said that he   cannot contemplate living anywhere but in his native land. His   books can; they are already living all round the world, now,   perhaps, more than ever before, in the future, perhaps, more than   now. But their vitality springs not least from the feeling that   roots his being to his country and its destiny. Here, too,   Solzhenitsyn is of the incomparable Russian tradition. The same   background offsets the gigantic predecessors who have derived   from Russia’s suffering the compelling strength and   inextinguishable love that permeate their work. There is little   room in their descriptions for idylls according to plan or   prescribed information about the future. But it would be a gross   misunderstanding of their quest for the truth not to feel in this   their profound decisive identification with the country whose   life provided their subject matter, and for whose life their   works are essential. The central figure in this powerful epic is   the invincible Mother Russia. She appears in various guises under   diverse names. One is Matryona, the main character in one of   Solzhenitsyn’s stories. Her lined face recalls the constant,   indomitable features and re-casts the spell of devotion that she   is able to offer and which she so proudly deserves.
Love is blind, the saying goes, and if so, it signifies her   instinct for self-preservation. Clear-sighted love does not   always conjure up an immediate response. Time and distance may be   – and have been – necessary for a true appreciation of the depth   and warmth of perceptive feeling. This has not been so in   Solzhenitsyn’s case. When his novel,
One Day in the Life of   Ivan Denisovich,
first appeared eight years ago, it was   recognised at once in his own country, and soon all over the   world, that a major new writer had entered the arena. As Pravda   wrote, ‘Solzhenitsyn’s narrative is reminiscent at times of   Tolstoy’s artistic force. An unusually talented author has been   added to our literature!’ It would also be difficult to outdo   Pravda’s exposé of the power exercised by Solzhenitsyn’s   narrative art: ‘Why is it that our heart contracts with pain as   we read this remarkable story at the same time as we feel our   spirits soar? The explanation lies in its profound humanity, in   the quality of mankind even in the hour of degradation.’
A message about special circumstances seldom travels far and the   words that fly round the world are those which appeal to, and   help us, all. Such are the words of Alexander Solzhenitsyn. They   speak to us of matters that we need to hear more than ever   before, of the individual’s indestructible dignity. Wherever that   dignity is violated, whatever the reason or the means, his   message is not only an accusation but also an assurance: those   who commit such a violation are the only ones to be degraded by   it. The truth of this is plain to see wherever one travels.
Even the external form which Solzhenitsyn seeks for his work   bears witness to his message. This form has been termed the   polyphone or horizontal novel. It might equally be described as a   story with no chief character. Which is to say that this is not   individualism at the expense of the surroundings. But nor may the   gallery of persons act as a collective that smothers the   individuals of which it is entirely composed. Solzhenitsyn has   explained what he means by polyphonism: each person becomes the   chief character whenever the action concerns him. This is not   just a technique, it is a creed. The narrative focuses on the   only human element in existence, the human individual, with equal   status among equals, one destiny among millions and a million   destinies in one. This is the whole of humanism in a nutshell,   for the kernel is love of mankind. This year’s Nobel Prize for   Literature has been awarded to the proclaimer of such a   humanism.
From
Les Prix Nobel
en 1970
, Editor Wilhelm Odelberg, [Nobel Foundation], Stockholm, 1971
Address to Alexandr Solzhenitsyn by Karl   Ragnar Gierow, of the Swedish Academy, on December 10, 1971
At the presentation of the Nobel prizes on   10 December 1970 I was charged by the Swedish Academy briefly to   introduce the Nobel prizewinner in literature. I did so in the
following words
, which I now beg you to   have a few minutes’ patience with.
As Alexander Solzhenitsyn could not be   present at the prizegiving, I have now come here to give him his   insignia.
I come alone but with open arms.
For this in the very way that shows most   clearly what the Nobel prize is intended to mean.
It is
not
a gesture of courtesy from   one nation to another.
It is an award to an individual man for his   own work, made by an academy which reaches its decisions without   consulting anyone else.
But above all, the ceremony that I am   attending here emphasizes the very nature of the dignity with   which the Nobel prize can be associated.
That dignity belongs to the recipient.
What prestige and importance the Nobel   prize possesses, it has gained through the prizewinners. Their   achievement it is which makes the mark of honour something other   than a sum of money and a couple of objects.
Alfred Nobel’s intention was, that what   mankind accomplishes in its best moments through its finest   efforts, shall also benefit humanity all over the world, without   respect to nation, language, race or creed.
To that extent the goal of which Nobel   dreamed can be said to be that which is happening here at this   moment.
If there is something we have the right to   wish for, it is that every gathering should take the form of this   one: a trusting fellowship between free people who, without fear,   desire each other’s good.
That is the hope, for the moment realized,   which must never be dashed. That is the demand which our earth   cannot afford to give up.
That is the significance of the ceremony   taking place here.
Dear Alexander Solzhenitsyn, when I now   hand over your Nobel diploma and your Nobel medal, I not only   express the hearty congratulations and warm admiration of the   Swedish Academy and the Nobel Foundation.
I also convey our deep gratitude for the   dignity and honour which your works confer upon the prize for   which the Swedish Academy is responsible.
From
Les Prix Nobel
en 1970
, Editor Wilhelm Odelberg, [Nobel Foundation], Stockholm, 1971
Address to Alexandr Solzhenitsyn by Karl   Ragnar Gierow, of the Swedish Academy, on December 10, 1974
Not only for the Swedish Academy but for   all of us the ceremony today has its particular significance: we   can, finally, hand over to the laureate of 1970 the insignia of   his award.
Mr Alexander Solzhenitsyn: I have already   made two speeches to you. The first one you couldn’t listen   to, because there was a frontier to cross. The second one I   couldn’t deliver, because there was a frontier to cross.   Your presence here today doesn’t mean that the frontiers   have at last been abolished. On the contrary, it means that you   are now on this side of a border that still exists. But the   spirit of your writings, as I understand it, the driving force of   your work, like the spirit and force of Alfred Nobel’s last   will and testament, is to open all frontiers, to enable man to   meet man, freely and confidently.
The difficulty is that such a confidence   can only be built on truth. And nowhere in this world of ours is   truth always greeted with pure pleasure. Truth goes from house to   house, and the dog barks at whom he does not know, says a stern   old philosopher. But all the more happy and grateful are those   who recognize the wandering stranger and ask him to spend the   night and his life with them, in the deep, even desperate hope   that the day may not be far off when a frontier is, as it should   be, merely a line on the map, which we pass on our way to   friends. Such should be, and could be, the case all around the   prospering and tormented planet which we inhabit.
Alexander Solzhenitsyn, my dear friend,   with these few words I convey to you the warm congratulations of   the Swedish Academy and ask you to receive from the hands of His   Majesty the King the insignia of the prize to whose value you   have added your honour.
From
, Literature 1968-1980
, Editor-in-Charge Tore Frängsmyr, Editor Sture Allén, World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore, 1993
