Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1972
Nobel Prize in Literature 1972 - Press release
Nobel Prize in Literature 1972
Heinrich Böll
- Heinrich Böll
Swedish   Academy
Translation from the Swedish text
Your Royal Highnesses, Ladies and   Gentlemen,
He who attempts to seize in a single grasp   the bountiful and very varied authorship of Heinrich Böll   finds himself holding an abstraction. Through these writings –   begun twenty years ago and culminating in last year’s novel
Gruppenbild mit Dame
– there runs, however, a twin theme   that might serve as such a synoptic abstraction. This could be   phrased: The homeless and the aesthetics of the humane. But   Böll’s homeless are not ill-fated individuals or human   wreckage cast up outside the bulwarks of society. He tells of a   society without a roof over its head, a derailed, displaced   epoch, standing on every street corner with hand outstretched,   begging for the charity of a kindred spirit and human fellowship.   This is the situation underlying Böll’s
Ästhetik des Humanen
.
He writes about what every human being   seeks in order to lead a human life, in little things as in   great, about “das Wohnen, die Nachbarschaft und die Heimat,   das Geld und die Liebe, Religion und Mahlzeiten”, to quote   his own enumeration. With its whole register from satire and   high-spirited parody to deep suffering, this is a form of   passionately engaged aesthetics and it also contains his literary   program. He who sets out to portray the bare necessities of life   keeps both feet on the ground.
Yet Böll has declared “Ich   brauche wenig Wirklichkeit”, a word to note, coming from   one who is regarded and who perhaps regards himself as a   realistic narrator. The reality he needs so little is that of the   classic 19th century novel, the reality that after a meticulous   study of detail is faithfully reproduced. Böll is highly   proficient at the method but employs it ironically; there is no   limit to the superfluity of detail.
But the jesting with this conscientious   form of registration is itself a demonstration of how little   Böll needs such a reality. His mastery includes the ability   to bring his setting and its figures to life with scanty,   sometimes barely suggested lines.
There is however another reality which   Böll’s writing continually requires: the background to   his existence, the air his generation breathed, the heritage into   which it came. That reality is the recurrent, intrusively   observed subject of Heinrich Böll’s writing, from the   start up to the magnum opus already mentioned,
Gruppenbild mit   Dame
, which so far crowns his work. Böll’s real   breakthrough came in the years 1953, 1954 and 1955 with three   novels published one after the other –
Und sagte kein einziges   Wort; Haus ohne Hüter
, and
Das Brot der frühen   Jahre
. Although it was presumably not the author’s   intention, these three titles serve to indicate the reality which   he so persistently and forcefully depicts. His background was   Germany’s years of famine, it was
Das Brot der   frühen Jahre
, the bread that never sufficed and often   was not there, the bread that had to be begged for or stolen if   one was to survive, and that diet is an indelible memory. The   heritage which he and his contemporaries had to administer was
Haus ohne Hüter
, house without caretaker, an   existence in ruins, with time a widow and the future fatherless.   The air he and his contemporaries breathed was inhaled with the   heavy hand of dictatorship on their throats,
Und sagte kein   einziges Wort
, because the hand smothered every sound.
It is not the smallest German miracle that   after such years of destitution a new generation of writers,   thinkers and researchers was ready so soon to shoulder their   country’s and their own essential task in the spiritual   life of our time. The renewal of German literature, to which   Heinrich Boll’s achievements witness and of which they are   a significant part, is not an experiment with form – a drowning   man scorns the butterfly stroke. Instead it is a rebirth out of   annihilation, a resurrection, a culture which, ravaged by icy   nights and condemned to extinction, sends up new shoots, blossoms   and matures to the joy and benefit of us all. Such was the kind   of work Alfred Nobel wished his Prize to reward.
Dear Mr. Böll,
As a given consequence of the homelessness that is one of the   main themes of your writing, comes the striving that you yourself   have indicated with the words: “Die Suche nach einer   bewohnbaren Sprache in einem bewohnbaren Land”. This   implies an antithesis of homelessness, a writing in which   everyone can feel at home. You reject a literature for an   initiated circle, you have declared, adding significantly:   “Eine Kirche wird eingeweiht, aber durch diesen Akt der   Einweihung nicht geschlossen, sondern geoffnet”. It is this   openness for the human aspect which gives space and raises the   arches higher in your works. And it is works in that spirit which   give us a certain right to set our hopes as well on a habitable   world. With these words I express the congratulations of the   Swedish Academy and ask you now to receive this year’s   Nobel Prize for Literature from the hands of His Royal Highness   the Crown Prince.
From
, Literature 1968-1980
, Editor-in-Charge Tore Frängsmyr, Editor Sture Allén, World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore, 1993
