Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1973
Nobel Prize in Literature 1973 - Press release
Nobel Prize in Literature 1973
Patrick White
- Patrick White
Swedish Academy
Translation from the Swedish text
Your Majesty, Your Royal Highnesses, Ladies   and Gentlemen,
This year’s Nobel Prize for Literature has   been awarded by the Swedish Academy to the Australian Patrick   White. In the – as always – brief citation, mention is made of   “his epic and psychological narrative art which has introduced a   new continent into literature”. These words have been somewhat   misunderstood in certain quarters. They are only intended to   emphasize the prominent position occupied by Patrick White in the   literature of his country: they should not be taken to deny the   existence of an important body of Australian literature apart   from his writings.
In fact a long succession of authors have   endowed Australian literature with an independence and a   character which are unmistakably Australian and by virtue of   which that literature has long deserved to be regarded in the   eyes of the world as something more than an extension of the   English tradition. It will be sufficient here to mention such   names as Henry Lawson and Henry Handel Richardson. Lawson was the   son of an immigrant Norwegian seaman by the name of Larsen, and   in his short stories he gave authentic expression to various   types of down-to-earth Australian experience. The authoress   writing under the name of Henry Handel Richardson achieved in her   most important sequence of novels an authentic and grandiose   memorial to her father as the exponent of a lingering British way   of life in Australia. Nor should one neglect a number of   ambitious but somewhat recondite poets who have heightened   Australian awareness and intensified the expressive powers of   their language.
For all his originality, there is no   denying that the work of Patrick White displays certain typical   features of Australian literature generally sharing with it the   background, natural history and ways of life of the country. It   is also well known that White stands in close relation to   advanced Australian pictorial artists such as Sidney Nolan,   Arthur Boyd and Russel Drysdale, who with the means at their   disposal aim at something of the same expressiveness as he sets   out to achieve in his writing. Also it is an encouraging sign   that White’s influence has gradually made itself felt and that   several of the most promising young writers are to be seen as his   successors in one way or another.
At the same time, however, it should be   emphasized that White is less preoccupied than some of his   representative colleagues with things specifically Australian.   Although most of his novels are set against an Australian   background, his main concern has been to depict people whose   problems and living situations are highly individualized,   transcending the local and the national. Even in his most   typically Australian epic,
The Tree of Man
, in which an   important part is played by nature and society, his principal aim   has been to portray his characters from the inside, to make them   come alive not so much in terms of typical or atypical settler   careers as in the guise of unique individuals. And when he   accompanies his explorer Voss into the wilderness of the   continent, that wilderness becomes first and foremost a dramatic   scenario for the obsession and self-sacrifice of a Nietzschean   willpower.
One is struck by the frequency with which   Patrick White has made his main characters to a greater or lesser   degree outsiders in relation to society: aliens, maladjusted or   retarded people and quite often mystics and zealots. It is as   though in these people, destitute and vulnerable as they are, he   found it easiest to discern the human qualities which fascinate   him. This is the case with the characters of
Riders in the   Chariot
, whose alien status or deviation brings them   persecution and suffering but who in a mystical way are also the   elect, victorious in their misfortune. It is also the case with   the two brothers in
The Solid Mandala
, with their   contradictory characters: the well-adjusted but spiritually   barren and the clumsy but intuitively percipient. In a way it is   also true of the all-pervading principal characters in White’s   two latest and largest novels: the artist in
The   Vivisector
and the old woman in
The Eye of the Storm
.   In the artist the creative urge is portrayed as a species of   curse, as a result of which his art becomes an all-consuming   effort of which both its practitioner and the people close to him   become the victims. In the old woman the author has taken the   experience of a cyclone as the mystical centre from which an   insight radiates to shed light on her life, with its many   misadventures, right up to the moment of her death.
Patrick White is a rather difficult author   not only because of his special ideas and problems but also   perhaps no less due to his unusual combination of epic and poetic   qualities. In his broad narrative he uses a highly compressed   language, a verbal art worked out to the last detail and   constantly aiming for a maximum of expressive effect, a   relentless intensification or a subtle penetration. Here beauty   and truth are closely allied or completely fused together: a   beauty radiating light and life, evoking the poetry inherent in   things, in nature and in all manner of phenomena, and truth which   exposes and liberates, even though at first it may seem repugnant   or frightening.
Patrick White is a social critic mainly   through his depiction of human beings, as befits a true novelist.   He is first and foremost a bold psychological explorer, at the   same time as he readily refers to ideological views of life or   mystical convictions to elicit the support and the uplifting   message which they have to offer. His relationship to himself,   like his relationship to his fellow beings, is complex and full   of contradictions. Exalted demands are thrown into sharp relief   against emphatic denials. Passion and longing are confronted by a   distinct puritanism. In contradistinction to what may be pride in   himself he glorifies humility and humiliation, a persistent   feeling of guilt that demands atonement and sacrifice. He is   constantly assailed by doubts concerning the capacity of thought   and art, even though he is indefatigable in his high-minded   pursuit of both these things.
Patrick White’s literary art has spread his   fame throughout the world and he now ranks as Australia’s   foremost representative in his field. His creative work,   performed in solitude and doubtless in the teeth of considerable   opposition, in various kinds of adversity, has gradually yielded   lasting and progressively more widely acknowledged results, in   spite of the doubts he himself may have had concerning the value   of his efforts. The controversial side of Patrick White is   connected with the extreme tension of his self-expression, with   his assault on the most difficult problems: the very qualities   that constitute his indisputable greatness. Without those   qualities he would be unable to bestow the consolation now   present in the very midst of his gloom: the conviction that there   must be something more worth living for than our onward rushing   civilization seems to offer.
The Swedish Academy regrets that Patrick   White is not here to-day. But as his representative we greet one   of his best friends, the excellent Australian artist Sidney   Nolan. And now I beg you, Mr. Nolan, to receive the Nobel Prize   for Literature, awarded to Patrick White, from the hands of His   Majesty the King.
From
, Literature 1968-1980
, Editor-in-Charge Tore Frängsmyr, Editor Sture Allén, World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore, 1993
