Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1974
Nobel Prize in Literature 1974
Eyvind Johnson
Harry Martinson
- Eyvind Johnson
- Harry Martinson
Swedish Academy
Translation from the Swedish text
Your Majesty, Your Royal Highnesses, Ladies   and Gentlemen,
Eyvind Johnson’s education – that is, the education provided by   society at that time – ended when he was thirteen and was   imparted to him at a little village school north of the Arctic   Circle. The future awaiting the young Harry Martinson opened up   to him when, at the age of six, as a so-called child of the   parish, he was sold by auction to the lowest bidder – that is, to   the person who took charge of the forsaken boy for the smallest   payment out of parochial funds. The fact that, with such a start   in life, both of them have their places on this platform today,   is the visible testimony to a transformation of society, which,   step by step, is still going on all over the world. With us it   came unusually early; it is perhaps our country’s biggest   blessing, perhaps, also, its most remarkable achievement during   the last thousand years.
Eyvind Johnson and Harry Martinson did not come alone, nor first.   They are representative of the many proletarian writers or   working-class poets who, on a wide front, broke into our   literature, not to ravage and plunder, but to enrich it with   their fortunes. Their arrival meant an influx of experience and   creative energy, the value of which can hardly be exaggerated. To   that extent they are representative also of the similar   breakthrough that has later occurred in the whole of our cultural   world. A new class has conquered Parnassus. But if, by a   conqueror, we mean the one who gained most from the outcome, then   Parnassus has conquered a new class.
To determine an author and his work against the background of his   social origin and political environment is, at present, good   form. And what is good form is seldom particularly to the point.   “Eyvind Johnson’s literary achievement is one of the most   significant and characteristic of a very fruitful period in the   whole of Europe.” This last sentence is not mine; it was written   thirty years ago by Lucien Maury. Even then, the boy from a   primary school in a remote village in the far north of Sweden was   an experienced and self-assured European, never forgetful of his   origin (of which his autobiographical stories provide a lasting   document), but still less bound and inhibited by the environment   where he took his first steps. International perspective   distinguished Eyvind Johnson’s further writings, and it is   matched by an equally wide outlook in time, over the destinies   and ages of the human race. The renewal of the historical novel   which he has carried out on his own, and perhaps exemplified most   clearly in great works like
Days of His Grace
and
Steps   Towards Silence
, is based not only on extensive research but   also on a clear-sightedness which, expressed briefly, sets out to   show that everything that happens to us has happened before, and   everything that took place once in the world is still taking   place, recognizable under changed signs, a constant simultaneity   of epochs which may be the only wisdom the past can teach us in   our attempts to survey the present and divine an era which we   have not yet seen.
If, nevertheless, we are to point to a special phase and one   particular mental environment whose traces are ineffaceable in   Eyvind Johnson’s work with his pen, it is that very period when   Lucien Maury discovered that in this Nordic writer, Europe had   one of its important intellectuals. The French time analyst   described this epoch as very fruitful. What was it that made it   so productive? Not favourable conditions, but the indomitable   resistance to the conditions that prevailed. D-day had not yet   dawned; Nazism still had a stranglehold on Europe. It was in that   predicament that Eyvind Johnson spoke out. His attitude was so   passionate that its fervour has never since vanished from what he   wrote. He retained his European perspective, but, naturally, it   was Scandinavia’s liberty that was dearest to him just then. He   endorsed his conviction with a handshake across the border.   Together with a co-editor on the Norwegian side he was   responsible during the occupation years for a mouthpiece of the   new Scandinavianism, called – “A Handshake”. As from today the   two publishers of that little paper are both Nobel Prizewinners.   The name of Eyvind Johnson’s co-editor on the Norwegian side of   the frontier was
Willy   Brandt
.
Both Eyvind Johnson and, still more, Harry Martinson have a lot   in common with the oldest, and perhaps, greatest of all   proletarian writers, the subtly wise and charming author of   ingenious fables, Aesop. Like him, they spin webs, capturing you   with beguiling words that always contain other, and more, than   what they literally say. But the differences between this year’s   two literary prizewinners are greater than the similarities.   Beside Eyvind Johnson, whose writing is based so very much on his   fiercely defended citizenship in a free society, Harry Martinson   may appear to be almost a purely asocial individual, the   incorrigible vagrant in our literature. No one has succeeded in   putting him under lock and key. The philosophic tramp, Bolle, in
The Road
is, in many ways, the author’s spokesman, and he   is not homeless at the gate. He is homeless only when he gets   inside four walls. He is the bearer of asocialism as a wish and a   principle that brings good luck; he is a vagabond of his own free   will, in agreement with life’s sound instincts and in spontaneous   revolt against what is trying to stifle them – that which is   governed by calculation and established by force. He already has   his home; it is beyond and outside, and he is always on the way   towards it. From this starting point, though in a different key,   we can also conceive the tragically beautiful vision of Aniara,   of the spaceship which heads away from an increasingly hostile   existence on a frozen earth and itself loses its rudder, cut off   from its home port and with its destination lost.
“I don’t want to have real that most people want to have real”,   Bolle remarks. In saying this he has also said quite a lot about   Harry Martinson’s writing. Realism is to be found there to the   extent that it can be called elemental: it is based on the   closest familiarity with the four elements. Harry Martinson got   to know earth and air as a tramp on the roads, fire and water as   a stoker at sea. Yet the world of imagination is more important   and more real to him than that of reality. Where realism plods   methodically along, his imagination races with the swallow-winged   glide of the skater. However, it is not a flight from truth; on   the contrary. “We must learn the essential difference between   what is factual and what is truth”, he has said. “We have facts   everywhere. They whirl in our eyes like sand.” But it is truth we   are concerned with, and that is something else. It is a state in   nature and in the receptive human being; it is
the good will with presence and peace of     mind
to keep watch and to be.
For Harry Martinson fact and fiction are   one, and, without any aphoristic hair-splitting, an entire   outlook on life is summed up in these pregnant words. The last   two, most emphasized, form the simple verb of mere existence: to   be. But existence is only fit for human beings if it gives them   pleasure, and for that, good will and vigilance are needed. So,   in the end, the truth to which this wanderer’s path has led him   is a gratitude, round-eyed as a child’s, for the generous life   that has constantly given him trials, riddles and joy in good   measure.
After this quickly cut-out silhouette of two remarkable literary   profiles, it is my very pleasant duty to express the heartfelt   congratulations of the Swedish Academy to Eyvind Johnson and   Harry Martinson and to ask them to receive the emblems of the   1974 Nobel Prize for Literature from the hands of His Majesty,   the King.
From
Les Prix Nobel
en 1974
, Editor Wilhelm Odelberg, [Nobel Foundation], Stockholm, 1975
