Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1975
Nobel Prize in Literature 1975 - Press release
Nobel Prize in Literature 1975
Eugenio Montale
- Eugenio Montale
Swedish Academy
Translation from the Swedish text
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highnesses,   Ladies and Gentlemen,
As we all know, this year’s Nobel Prize for   Literature has been awarded to Eugenio Montale, from Italy. He   comes from Eastern Liguria, a coastal landscape whose harsh   character is reflected in his poetry. In this there echoes   through the years a musical surge of waves which confronts his   own destiny with the stern and beauteous majesty of the   Mediterranean. Montale’s famous first book from 1925 bears too   the strange title
Ossi di seppia
, which means “Bones of   the Cuttlefish” and clearly emphasizes his distinctive Ligurian   character.
At the outset of his career he encountered   the fascist dictatorship’s atmosphere of suppression of free   speech and enforced standardization. Montale refused to write to   order and therefore came to belong to the picked troop of free   authors who, in spite of everything, managed to hold their own   under cover of the so-called hermeticism. His personality was   hardened by bitter experience. He served in the first world war   as an infantry officer in the Tyrolean Alps, and later became   head of the famous Vieusseux Library in Florence. In 1939 he was   abruptly dismissed; not having a fascist party membership card he   could not be regarded as an Italian citizen. Not until 1948 was   he appointed an editor of
Corriere della sera
, the big   Milan newspaper, in which for many years he has made a name for   himself as an outstanding writer on cultural matters and as a   music critic.
Montale has slowly confirmed his key   position in Italy’s modern literature during this epoch, in many   ways so tragic for his native land. To a great extent he can be   said to represent this sombre awareness, which seeks individual   expression of collective sorrows and troubles. As a poet he   interprets this awareness with calm dignity and without any   political publicity. He has also gained a seriously listening   audience, a fact remarkable in that his lyrical writing is   restricted to five books of poems at long intervals. The foremost   work is undoubtedly
La bufera e altro
(“The Storm and   Other Things”), which was published in 1956. Nor does his   reserved and thoughtful temperament court popularity.
Montale himself once stated that as an   Italian he wanted before anything else to “wring the neck of   eloquence in the old rhetorical language, even at the risk of   finding himself in an anti-eloquence”. Actually he has gladly   taken that risk, and his latest book of poems,
Diario
, a   diary from the years 1971 to 1972 consists largely of ironic   remarks and epigrams in which the ageing poet lets himself go and   criticizes contemporary reality with an almost anti-poetic   tendency. His winged horse is a fairly restless spirit, which   refuses to stand still docilely in the stall of honour.
But at his best Montale, with strict   discipline, has attained a refined artistry, at once personal and   objective, in which every word fills its place as precisely as   the glass cube in a coloured mosaic. The linguistic laconicism   cannot be carried any further; every trace of embellishment and   jingle has been cleared away. When, for instance, in the   remarkable portrait-poem of the Jewes Dora Markus, he wants to   indicate the current background of time, he does so in five   words:
Distilla veleno una fede feroce
(“A fierce faith   distils poison”). In such masterpieces both the fateful   perspective and the ingeniously concentrated structure are   reminiscent of T.S. Eliot and “The Waste Land”, but Montale is   unlikely to have received impulses from this quarter and his   development has, if anything, followed a parallel path.
During the half-century in which he has   worked, Montale’s attitude can be summed up as a fundamental   pessimism on the classical line from Leopardi. This pessimism is   seldom purely emotional, but manifests itself as a deeply mature,   rational insight retaining the critical right both to ask and   defy. His conviction is that poor humanity is slipping downhill,   that the lessons of history have little value, and that world   destitution is going from bad to worse. When he surveys the   present juncture he finds that the real evil lies in the fact   that the scale of values of another age can be completely lost;   in other words, the memory of the great spirits of the past in   their striving to build up something which enables us to create   another picture of our earthly existence and its conditions.
But his resignation does contain a spark of   confidence in life’s instinct to go on, to overcome the   accumulated obstacles. Montale would not be the born poet he is,   if he did not believe deep down that poetry – without being a   mass medium – even in our time is still a gentle power which,   unperceived, can act as one of the voices of human conscience,   faintly heard admittedly, but indestructible and   indispensable.
Dear Mr Montale! In the all too brief time   at my disposal I have tried to present your poetry and to justify   our award. It only remains for me now to express the heartfelt   congratulations of the Swedish Academy and to ask you to receive   this year’s Nobel Prize for Literature from the hands of His   Majesty the King.
From
, Literature 1968-1980
, Editor-in-Charge Tore Frängsmyr, Editor Sture Allén, World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore, 1993
