Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1976
Nobel Prize in Literature 1976 - Press release
Nobel Prize in Literature 1976
Saul Bellow
- Saul Bellow
Swedish Academy
Translation from the Swedish text
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highnesses,   Ladies and Gentlemen,
When Saul Bellow published his first book,   the time had come for a change of climate and generation in   American narrative art. The so-called hard-boiled style, with its   virile air and choppy prose, had now slackened into an everyday   routine, which was pounded out automatically; its rigid paucity   of words left not only much unsaid but also most of it unfelt,   unexperienced. Bellow’s first work,
Dangling Man
(1944),   was one of the signs portending that something else was at   hand.
In Bellow’s case emancipation from the   previous ideal style took place in two stages. In the first he   reached back to the kind of perception that had found its already   classic guides in Maupassant, Henry James and Flaubert perhaps   most of all. The masters he followed expressed themselves as   restrainedly as those he turned his back on. But the emphasis was   elsewhere. What gave a story its interest was not the dramatic,   sometimes violent action but the light it shed over the   protagonist’s inner self. With that outlook the novel’s heroes   and heroines could be regarded, seen through and exposed, but not   glorified. The anti-hero of the present was already on the way,   and Bellow became one of those who took care of him.
Dangling Man
, the man without a   foothold, was thus a significant watchword to Bellow’s writing   and has to no small extent remained so. He pursued the line in   his next novel,
The Victim
(1947) and, years later, with   mature mastery in
Seize the Day
(1956). With its exemplary   command of subject and form the last-mentioned novel has received   the accolade as one of the classic works of our time.
But with the third story in this   stylistically coherent suite, it is as if Bellow had turned back   in order at last to complete something which he himself had   already passed. With his second stage, the decisive step, he had   already left this school behind him, whose disciplined form and   enclosed structure gave no play to the resources of exuberant   ideas, flashing irony, hilarious comedy and discerning compassion   which he also knew he possessed and whose scope he must try out.   The result was something quite new, Bellow’s own mixture of rich   picaresque novel and subtle analysis of our culture, of   entertaining adventure, drastic and tragic episodes in quick   succession, interspersed with philosophic conversation with the   reader-that too very entertaining-all developed by a commentator   with a witty tongue and penetrating insight into the outer and   inner complications that drive us to act or prevent us from   acting and that can be called the dilemma of our age.
First in the new phase came
The   Adventures of Augie March
(1953). The very wording of the   title points straight to the picaresque, and the connexion is   perhaps most strongly in evidence in this novel. But here Bellow   had found his style, and the tone recurs in the following series   of novels that form the bulk of his work:
Henderson the Rain   King
(1959),
Herzog
(1964),
Mr Samler’s Planet
(1970) and
Humboldt’s Gift
(1975). The structure is   apparently loose-jointed but for this very reason gives the   author ample opportunity for descriptions of different societies;   they have a rare vigour and stringency and a swarm of colourful,   clearly defined characters against a background of carefully   observed and depicted settings, whether it is the magnificent   facades of Manhattan in front of the backyards of the slums and   semi-slums, Chicago’s impenetrable jungle of resourceful   businessmen intimately intertwined with obliging criminal gangs,   or the more literal jungle, in the depths of Africa, where the   novel,
Henderson the Rain King
, the writer’s most   imaginative expedition, takes place. In a nutshell they are all   stories on the move and, like the first book, are about a man   with no foothold, but (and it is important to add this) a man who   keeps on
trying to find
a foothold during his wanderings   in our tottering world.
Even a few minutes’ sketch of Bellow’s   many-sided writings should indicate where that foothold lies. It   cannot be pointed out, as none of his protagonists reaches it.   But during their escapades they are all on the run, not
from
something but
towards
something, a goal   somewhere which will give them what they lack – firm ground under   their feet. “I want, I want, I want!” Henderson exclaims, and   sets off for an unknown continent. What his demands are he does   not know; what he demands is to find out, and his own desire is   the unknown continent. “A worthwhile fate,” Augie March calls his   goal. And Herzog, the restless seeker after truth, for his part   tries out one phrasing after the other of what he means by “a   worthwhile fate”. At one point he says confidently that “the   realm of facts and that of value are not eternally separated”.   The words are uttered in passing but are worth dwelling on, and   if we think of them as coming from Bellow himself they are   essential. Giving value a place side by side with palpable facts   is, as regards literature, a definite departure from realism. As   a philosophy it is a protest against the determinism that must   make man unaccountable for his actions as well as inert or   hostile to life, since it prevents him from feeling, choosing and   acting himself. The awareness of a value, on the other hand,   gives man freedom, thereby responsibility, thereby a desire for   action and a faith in the future. That is why Bellow, never one   to look through rose-coloured spectacles, is at heart an   optimist. It is the light of that conviction which makes the   facets of his writing sparkle. His “anti-heroes” are victims of   constant disappointment, born to defeat without end, and Bellow   (it cannot be over-emphasized) loves and is able to transform the   fate they find worthwhile into superb comedies. But they triumph   nonetheless, they are heroes nonetheless, since they never give   up the realm of values in which man becomes human. And, as Augie   March says, anyone can become alive to this fact at any moment,   however unfortunate he may be, “if he will be quiet and wait it   out”.
The realm of facts and that of value – the   very combination of words is reminiscent of a work by the   philosopher Wolfgang Köhler, professor first at   Göttingen, then in Berlin, finally at Princeton, to which he   fled from the Nazis. Köhler’s book is called
The Place of   Value in a World of Facts
and lent its name to an   international Nobel symposium in Stockholm some years ago, at   which a lecture was given by E. H. Gombrich, disciple and younger   friend of Köhler. He told of the latter’s last night in   Berlin, before the flight could be carried out. Köhler spent   the slow hours with like-minded friends, and while they waited,   wondering if a patrol would clamp up the stairs at the last   moment and pound on the door with rifle butts, they played   chamber music. “Such is,” Gombrich remarked, “the place of value   in a world of facts”.
The threatened position of value between   obtrusive realities has not escaped Bellow; that is what he is   always writing about. But he does not think that either mankind’s   conduct or the explosive development of the sciences betoken a   world catastrophe. He is an optimist-in-spite-of-all, and thus   also an opposition leader of human kindness. Truth must out, of   course. But it is not always hostile. Facing the truth is not   necessarily the same as braving death. “There may be truths on   the side of life,” he has said. “There may be some truths which   are, after all, our friends in the universe.”
In an interview once Bellow described   something of what happens when he writes. Most of us, he   supposed, have a primitive prompter or commentator within, who   from earliest years has been telling us what the real world is.   He himself has such a commentator in him; he has to prepare the   ground for him and take notice of what he says. One is put in   mind of another man who went out into the highways and byways   with his questions, taking notice of his inner voice : Socrates   and his daemon. This introspective listening demands seclusion.   As Bellow himself puts it, “Art has something to do with the   achievement of stillness in the midst of chaos. A stillness which   characterizes prayer, too, and the eye of the storm.” This was   what prevailed when Köhler played chamber music on his last   night in Berlin while, aware of imminent disaster, “being quiet   and waiting it out”. It is there that the value and dignity of   life and mankind have their sole haven, ever storm-lashed, and it   is from that stillness that Saul Bellow’s work, borne on the   whirlwind of disquiet, derives its inspiration and strength.
Dear Mr Bellow, it is my task and my great   pleasure to convey to you the warm congratulations of the Swedish   Academy and to ask you to receive from the hands of His Majesty   the King the Nobel Prize for Literature of the year 1976.
From
, Literature 1968-1980
, Editor-in-Charge Tore Frängsmyr, Editor Sture Allén, World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore, 1993
