Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1978
Nobel Prize in Literature 1978
Isaac Bashevis Singer
- Isaac Bashevis Singer
Swedish Academy
Translation from the Swedish text
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highnesses,   Ladies and Gentlemen,
“Heaven and earth conspire that everything which has been, be   rooted out and reduced to dust. Only the dreamers, who dream   while awake, call back the shadows of the past and braid from   unspun threads, unspun nets.” These words from one of Isaac   Bashevis Singer’s stories in the collection
The Spinoza of   Market Street
(1961) say quite a lot about the writer himself   and his narrative art.
Singer was born in a small town or village in eastern Poland and   grew up in one of the poor, over-populated Jewish quarters of   Warsaw, before and during the First World War. His father was a   rabbi of the Hasid school of piety, a spiritual mentor for a   motley collection of people who sought his help. Their language   was Yiddish – the language of the simple people and of the   mothers, with its sources far back in the middle ages and with an   influx from several different cultures with which this people had   come in contact during the many centuries they had been scattered   abroad. It is Singer’s language. And it is a storehouse which has   gathered fairytales and anecdotes, wisdom, superstitions and   memories for hundreds of years past through a history that seems   to have left nothing untried in the way of adventures and   afflictions. The Hasid piety was a kind of popular Jewish   mysticism. It could merge into prudery and petty-minded, strict   adherence to the law. But it could also open out towards   orgiastic frenzy and messianic raptures or illusions.
This world was that of East-European Jewry – at once very rich   and very poor, peculiar and exotic but also familiar with all   human experience behind its strange garb. This world has now been   laid waste by the most violent of all the disasters that have   overtaken the Jews and other people in Poland. It has been rooted   out and reduced to dust. But it comes alive in Singer’s writings,   in his waking dreams, his very waking dreams, clear-sighted and   free of illusion but also full of broad-mindedness and   unsentimental compassion. Fantasy and experience change shape.   The evocative power of Singer’s inspiration acquires the stamp of   reality, and reality is lifted up by dreams and imagination into   the sphere of the supernatural, where nothing is impossible and   nothing is sure.
Singer began his writing career in Warsaw in the years between   the wars. Contact with the secularized environment and the   surging social and cultural currents involved a liberation from   the setting in which he had grown up – but also a conflict. The   clash between tradition and renewal, between other-worldliness   and pious mysticism on the one hand and free thought, doubt and   nihilism on the other, is an essential theme in Singer’s short   stories and novels. Among many other themes, it is dealt with in   Singer’s big family chronicles – the novels
The Family   Moskat
,
The Manor
and
The Estate
, from the   1950s and 1960s. These extensive epic works depict how old Jewish   families are broken up by the new age and its demands and how   they are split, socially and humanly. The author’s apparently   inexhaustible psychological fantasy and insight have created a   microcosm, or rather a well-populated micro-chaos, out of   independent and graphically convincing figures.
Singer’s earliest fictional works, however, were not big novels   but short stories and novellas. The novel
Satan in Goray
appeared in 1935, when the Nazi terror was threatening and just   before the author emigrated to the USA, where he has lived and   worked ever since. It treats of a theme to which Singer has often   returned in different ways – the false Messiah, his seductive   arts and successes, the mass hysteria around him, his fall and   the breaking up of illusions in destitution and new illusions or   in penance and purity.
Satan in Goray
takes place in the   17th century after the cruel ravages of the Cossacks with   outrages and mass murder of Jews and others. The book anticipates   what was to come in
our
time. These people are not wholly   evil, not wholly good – they are haunted and harassed by things   over which they have no control, by the force of circumstances   and by their own passions – something alien but also very   close.
This is typical of Singer’s view of humanity – the power and   fickle inventiveness of obsession, the destructive but also   inflaming and creative potential – of the emotions and their   grotesque wealth of variation. The passions can be of the most   varied kinds – often sexual but also fanatical hopes and dreams,   the figments of terror, the lure of lust or power, the nightmares   of anguish. Even boredom can become a restless passion, as with   the main character in the tragicomic picaresque novel
The   Magician of Lublin
(1961), a kind of Jewish Don Juan and   rogue, who ends up as an ascetic or saint. In a sense a   counterpart to this book is
The Slave
(1962), really a   legend of a lifelong, faithful love which becomes a compulsion,   forced into fraud despite its purity, heavy to bear though sweet,   saintly but with the seeds of shamefulness and deceit. The saint   and the rogue are near of kin.
Singer has perhaps given of his best as a consummate storyteller   and stylist in the short stories and in the numerous and   fantastic novellas, available in English translation in about a   dozen collections. The passions and crazes are personified in   these strange tales as demons, spectres and ghosts, all kinds of   infernal or supernatural powers from the rich storehouse of   Jewish popular belief or of his own imagination. These demons are   not only graphic literary symbols but also real, tangible forces.   The middle ages seem to spring to life again in Singer’s works,   the daily round is interwoven with wonders, reality is spun from   dreams, the blood of the past pulsates in the present. This is   where Singer’s narrative art celebrates its greatest triumphs and   bestows a reading experience of a deeply original kind, harrowing   but also stimulating and edifying. Many of his characters step   with unquestioned authority into the Pantheon of literature where   the eternal companions and mythical figures live, tragic – and   grotesque, comic and touching, weird and wonderful – people of   dream and torment, baseness and grandeur.
Dear Mr. Singer, master and magician! It is my task and my great   pleasure to convey to you the heartiest congratulations of the   Swedish Academy and to ask you to receive from the hands of His   Majesty the King the Nobel Prize for Literature 1978.
From
Les Prix Nobel
. The Nobel Prizes 1978
, Editor Wilhelm Odelberg, [Nobel Foundation], Stockholm, 1979
