Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1986 - Presentation Speech
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1986
Nobel Prize in Literature 1986 - Press release
Nobel Prize in Literature 1986
Wole Soyinka
- Wole Soyinka
Swedish Academy
Translation from the Swedish text
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highnesses,   Ladies and Gentlemen,
Wole Soyinka, born in Nigeria in 1934, writes in English and is   chiefly recognized as a dramatist. His many-sided and vital   literary works also include some important collections of poems   and novels, an interesting autobiography and a large number of   articles and essays. He has been, and is, very active as a man of   the theatre and has staged his own plays in England and Nigeria.   He has himself taken part as an actor and energetically joined in   theatrical debates and theatre policies. During the civil war in   Nigeria in the middle of the 1960s he was drawn into the struggle   for liberty because of his opposition to violence and terror. He   was imprisoned under brutal and illegal forms in 1967 and was   released over two years later – an experience that drastically   affected his outlook on life and literary work.
Soyinka has depicted his childhood in a   little African village. His father was a teacher, his mother a   social worker – both Christian. But in the preceding generation   there were medicine men and others who believed firmly in   spirits, magic, and rites of anything but a Christian kind. We   encounter a world in which tree sprites, ghosts, sorcerer and   primitive African traditions were living realities. We also come   face to face with a more complicated world of myth, which has its   roots far back in an African culture handed down by word of   mouth. This account of childhood gives a background to Soyinka’s   literary works – a self-experienced, close connection with a rich   and complex African heritage.
Soyinka made an early appearance as a   dramatist. It was natural for him to seek this art form, which is   closely linked with the African material and with African forms   of linguistic and mime creation. His plays make frequent and   skilful use of many elements belonging to stage art and which   also have genuine roots in African culture-dance and rites,   masques and pantomime, rhythm and music, declamation, theatre   within the theatre etc. His first dramas are lighter and more   playful than the later ones – pranks, ironical and satirical   scenes, pictures of everyday life with telling and witty   dialogue, often with a tragicomical or grotesque sense of life as   keynote. Among these early plays can be mentioned
A Dance of   the Forests
– a kind of African “Midsummer Night’s Dream”,   with dryads, ghosts, spirits, and gods or demi-gods. It is about   creativeness and sacrifice, with the god or hero Ogun as one of   the performers. This Ogun is a Prometheus – like figure – the   demigod of iron and artistic skill but also of war and battle, a   double figure combining both creation and destruction in his   being. Soyinka has often reverted to him.
Soyinka’s dramas are deeply rooted in an   African world and culture. But he is also a widely read, not to   say learned writer and dramatist. He is familiar with western   literature, from the Greek tragedies to
Beckett
and Brecht.   Also outside the field of drama he is well versed in the great   European literature. A writer like James Joyce, for instance, has   left traces in his novels. Soyinka is an author who writes with   great deliberation, and especially in his novels and poems he can   be avant-gardistically sophisticated.
During the war years, his time in prison   and afterwards, his writing takes on a more tragic character. The   psychological, moral and social conflicts appear more and more   complex and menacing. The book-keeping of good and evil, of   destructive and constructive forces, becomes increasingly   ambiguous. His dramas become equivocal – dramas which in the   shape of allegory or satire take up moral, social, and political   matters for mythical-dramatic creation. The dialogue is   sharpened, the characters become more expressive, often   exaggerated to the point of caricature, demanding denouement –   the dramatic temperature is raised. The vitality is no less than   in the first works – on the contrary: the satire, the humour, the   elements of grotesquery and comedy, and the mythical fable-making   come vividly to life. The way in which Soyinka makes use of the   mythical material, the African, and the literary schooling, the   European, is very independent. He says he uses the myths as “the   aesthetic matrix” for his writing. It is thus not a question of a   folkloristic reproduction, a kind of exoticism, but an   independent and co-operative work. The myths, traditions, and   rites are integrated as nourishment for his writing, not a   masquerade costume. He has called his wide reading and literary   awareness a “selective eclecticism” – i.e. purposeful and   sovereign choice. Among the later dramas special mention can be   made of
Death and the King’s Horseman
– a genuinely,   dramatically convincing work full of many ideas and meanings, of   poetry, satire, surprise, cruelty, and lust. Superficially it is   about a conflict between western morals and convention on the one   hand, and African culture and tradition on the other. The theme   moves around a ritual or cultic human sacrifice. The drama goes   so deeply into human and superhuman conditions that it cannot be   reduced to something that teaches us about breaches between   different civilizations. Soyinka himself prefers to see it as a   metaphysical and religious drama of fate. It is about the   conditions of the human identity and realization, the mythical   pact of life and death, and the possibilities of the unborn.
To Soyinka’s non-dramatic works belong the   autobiographically inspired accounts
The Man Died
, from   his time in prison, and the novel
The Interpreters
, from   intellectual circles in Nigeria. The novel
Season of Anomy
is an allegory with the Orpheus and Eurydice myth as framework, a   somewhat complicated, symbolic-expressionistic story with a   background in brutal social and political conditions of   oppression and corruption. Outstanding among the poems are   collections with motifs from his time in prison, some of them   written during his imprisonment as a kind of mental exercise to   help the author survive with dignity and fortitude. The imagery   in these poems is compact and rather hard to penetrate,   sometimes, however, with a laconic or ascetic concentration. It   takes some time to get to know them intimately, but they can then   yield a strange emanation that gives evidence of their background   and role in a harsh, difficult period in the poet’s life – moving   testimony to courage and artistic strength.
As already mentioned, it is chiefly the   dramas that stand out as Wole Soyinka’s most significant   achievement. They are of course made to be acted on the stage,   with dance, music, masques, and mime as essential components. But   his plays can also be read as important and fascinating literary   works from a richly endowed writer’s experience and imagination –   and with roots in a composite culture with a wealth of living and   artistically inspiring traditions.
Dear Mr. Soyinka, In your versatile   writings you have been able to synthesize a very rich heritage   from your own country, ancient myths and old traditions, with   literary legacies and traditions of European culture. There is a   third component, a most important component in what you have thus   achieved – your own genuine and impressive creativity as an   artist, a master of language, and your commitment as a dramatist   and writer of poetry and prose to problems of general and deep   significance for man, modern or ancient. It is my privilege to   convey to you the warm congratulations of the Swedish Academy and   to ask you to receive this year’s Nobel Prize for Literature from   the hand of His Majesty the King.
From
, Literature 1981-1990
, Editor-in-Charge Tore Frängsmyr, Editor Sture Allén, World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore, 1993
