Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1995 - Presentation Speech
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1995
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1995 - Press release
Nobel Prize in Literature 1995
Seamus Heaney
- Seamus Heaney
Swedish   Academy
Translation from the Swedish text
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highnesses,   Ladies and Gentlemen,
The Irish poet Seamus Heaney was born in County Derry in Northern   Ireland. The thatched farmhouse he grew up in was called Mossbawn   – a name that has become mythical in Heaney’s poetry. It is a   place that occurs and re-occurs in concrete nearness in Heaney’s   poetry, from his debut in 1966 with
Death of a Naturalist
until
Seeing Things
, the most recent, published in 1991.   As an example of his choice of subject matter and his style, one   can choose the opening lines of “A drink of water”, from
Field   Work
published in 1979: “She came every morning to draw   water/Like an old bat staggering up the field:/The pump’s   whooping cough, the bucket’s clatter/And slow diminuendo as it   filled,/Announced her.”
It is no pastoral idyll that Seamus Heaney   conjures up, but rather the toilsome, lethargic greyness of the   diurnal. Like Wordsworth, Seamus Heaney can well describe each   human being as “a Child of Earth”. For Seamus Heaney, poetry,   like the soil, is evidently something to be ploughed and turned   over.
The poet has little time for the Emerald   Isle of the tourist brochures. For him Ireland is first and   foremost
The Bogland
.
Heaney sees Ireland’s peat bogs as a symbol   of its identity, just as the potato is – with all that this   recalls of the suffering during The Great Hunger in the middle of   the 19th century.
The peat bogs also evoke, in their special   way, the feeling of the past. One of Seamus Heaney’s most   expressive poems accounts for his experience of the Iron Age   Tollund Man, whose body was preserved in a peat bog in Jutland.   In his figure Heaney conjures forth, brutally and movingly, a   culture that is both alien and familiar, a distinctive subject of   ritual sacrifice, human voices silenced by the boggy   landscape.
The water in the peat bogs, indeed all   water, is something Seamus Heaney associates with the feminine,   the Gaelic, the Catholic, the creative element in his nature. All   this is deeply grounded in the poet’s very being, a childhood   preserved – as it were – which has not been overshadowed by his   secularised British upbringing or the bitter experiences of The   Troubles, the conflict in Ulster. In this context it must be said   that Seamus Heaney never reduces reality to a matter of political   slogans, he writes about the fates of individuals, of personal   friends who have been afflicted by the heedless violence – in the   background somewhere there is Dante, who could yoke the political   to the transcendental.
Heaney also has links with the academic   world. He has taught in Belfast and Dublin, he has been Professor   of Poetry at Oxford, and since 1982 he has been teaching rhetoric   and oratory at Harvard in the United States.
Seamus Heaney comes from a humble, farming   community, but at the same time we meet in him a learned poet who   in the very microcosm of language cultivates and reveals the   Celtic, pre-Christian and Catholic literary heritage. He does   this in his poetry, and in five collections of eminently readable   essays, including
The Government of the Tongue
(1968),
The Place of Writing
(1989) and
The Redress of   Poetry
– the volume published this year that contains the   lectures he gave at Oxford.
In his essays and meditations, Heaney also   specifies the poetic turning points which arose from   confrontation with some remarkable poets – British, Irish,   American and European – not infrequently in the spirit of his   compatriot and great predecessor Patrick Kavanagh’s principle:   the local can articulate the universal… God is in the bits and   pieces of the Everyday.
Dear Seamus Heaney,
I have just given the audience some “bits and pieces” about   reality and symbol in your poems. Let me now remind you of your   own Declaration of Independence – Poetry can never be reduced to   a political, historical or moral issue. In the final resort   poetry is its own reality. Ever since
Death of a   Naturalist
I have admired the way in which you turn your back   on the systematisers, to defend instead poetic creativity as a   free, natural, biological process. We all admire your revealing   and compelling images and rhythms, we are gladdened by your quest   for sacred wells and the sudden eruption of Beauty. I am happy to   convey to you, on behalf of the Swedish Academy, our warmest   congratulations on the Nobel Prize in Literature for 1995 and to   invite you to receive the Prize from the hands of His Majesty the   King.
From
, Literature 1991-1995
, Editor Sture Allén, World Scientific Publishing Co., Singapore, 1997
