Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1996 - Presentation Speech
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1996
Nobel Prize in Literature 1996 - Press release
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1996 - Biobibliographical Note
Nobel Prize in Literature 1996
Wisława Szymborska
- Wisława Szymborska
Swedish   Academy
Translation of the Swedish text
*
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highness, Ladies   and Gentlemen,
How are we to live after the adulteration, demise, and   disintegration of the great utopias? – we ask ourselves now,   looking toward the year 2000. How are we to live after the great   disillusionment? With what means shall we arrive at values, by   what path reach an authentic conception of life that is no longer   distorted?
“Aesthetics is the mother of ethics”,
Brodsky
says.   Or: “If mankind’s negative potential expresses itself in murder,   its positive potential manifests itself best in art.”
During the long period of the ideological   recasting of human consciousness, which we have just left behind   us, some of Polish postwar poetry emerged as a sign of hope, a   sewage treatment plant for mutilated and contaminated language –   thus for the life of the mind and the perception of life as well.   In the mere existence of poetic language, in the patient   word-work of distinguishing genuine from sham, false tone from   true, an entire society’s purification process functioned and   continues to function slowly, invisibly, underground.
In Wislawa Szymborska the Swedish Academy   wants to honour a representative – and a representative of   unusual and unyielding purity and strength – of a poetic outlook.   Of poetry as a response to life, a way of life, of the word-work   as thought and responsibility.
Wislawa Szymborska’s making of poems is the   perfection of the word-object, of the exquisitely chiseled   thought-image –
allegro ma non troppo
, as one of her poems   is called. But a darkness that is never directly touched is   perceptible, just as the movement of blood under the skin. For   Szymborska, as for many other contemporary Polish poets, the   starting point is the experience of a catastrophe, the ground   caving in beneath her, the complete collapse of a faith. In its   place human conditions break in with their inaccessibly   shimmering agitation, their dailiness and pettiness, their tears   and their jests, their tenderness. These conditions demand their   particular language, a language that makes things relative, a   language that methodically starts from scratch. The path of   language is through negation – the prerequisite for being able to   build anew is to build from nothing. From that point a game of   role-playing begins, the wonderful dramaturgy of the world:
Life (I say) I’ve no idea
what I could compare you to.
A devotion to the mystery of surface begins   here – perhaps paradoxically, perhaps the necessary   life-sustaining paradox – and becomes one of the many languages   of changing roles, one of the many capricious harlequin languages   of transformation and identification.
In Szymborska surface is depth, the path of   negation has the effect of a quiet but tremendous explosion of   being. “My identifying features / are rapture and despair”. The   farther in one travels among the clear mirrors of her language   pictures – crystalline clarity that in some way exists to lead   one to a final enigma – the more one feels the world’s obtrusive   unambiguousness being transformed. A shimmer of wonder and of   particulars hovers over the world’s motionless base of rock, to   whom she gives voice:
“I don’t have a door”, says the stone.
I would sum up Wislawa Szymborska’s   undertaking as a deeply transformative word-work with the state   of the world. One that is best summarized in her own words in the   poem
Discovery
:
I believe in the refusal to take part.
I believe in the ruined career.
I believe in the wasted years of work.
I believe in the secret taken to the grave.
These words soar for me beyond all rules
without seeking support from actual examples.
My faith is strong, blind, and without foundation.
Dear Wislawa Szymborska,
I am happy to convey to you, on behalf of The Swedish Academy,   our warmest congratulations on the Nobel Prize in Literature for   1996 and to invite you to receive the prize from the hands of His   Majesty the King.
*Translated from   Swedish by Rika Lesser. Translations of poems from Wislawa   Szymborska:
View with a Grain of Sand. Selected poems
.   Translated from Polish by Stanislaw Baranczak and Clare Cavanagh   (Harcourt Brace, 1995).
From
Les Prix Nobel
. The Nobel Prizes 1996
, Editor Tore Frängsmyr, [Nobel Foundation], Stockholm, 1997
