Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1997 - Presentation Speech
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1997
Nobel Prize for Literature 1997 - Press release
The Nobel Prize for Literature 1997 - Biobibliographical Notes
Nobel Prize in Literature 1997
Dario Fo
- Dario Fo
Swedish Academy
,    December 10, 1997.
Translation of the Swedish text.
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highnesses,   Ladies and Gentlemen,
To be a jester is, and always has been, a serious matter. Swedish   mediaeval laws stipulated that it cost a man smaller fines to lay   violent hands on somebody from a neighbouring county than on a   man from his own part of the country; but to assault a jester, on   the other hand, cost him nothing at all. If a jester is beaten   up, says the thirteenth-century law concerning such people, it   shall not be counted an offence. If a jester comes to bodily   harm, he shall have and suffer what was given him – infamy and   injury. “Let him never appeal for more justice than a thral woman   lashed on her bare back.”
One of Dario Fo’s sources of inspiration is   exactly these mediaeval jesters, unprotected by any law.   According to Fo satire is what makes the most forceful impact on   man. Mixing laughter and seriousness is his way of telling the   truth about abuses and unrighteousness. For Alfred Nobel literary   achievements were important means for fulfilling the fundamental   aim of the awards, namely to confer benefit on mankind. The   maintenance of human dignity is unquestionably an essential   aspect of this.
Fo often refers explicitly to the mediaeval   joculatores and their comedy and mysteries. In fact, a central   work in his oeuvre, “Mistero buffo” – “The Comic Mysteries” – is   based on old material culled from many different quarters. In the   scene called “The Birth of the Jester” the crucial moment occurs   when a landlord avid for more land violates the wife of the man   who is breaking untilled ground. “The Marriage at Cana” is seen   from the point of view of the intoxicated wine-drinker. In “The   Resurrection of Lazarus” the provocative question is whether   Jesus will succeed.
There are several other sources. Furthest   away in time we seem to glimpse Plautus and Terence in Rome, who   were of renewed interest in fifteenth century Italy. The commedia   dell’arte, a creation of the sixteenth century, is of importance   with its set-character parts and its oral tradition. It is also   possible to catch a sly glance from Bottom the weaver and Sir   Andrew Aguecheek. Impulses from our own days come from   Maiakovski’s epic-satirical poetry and from Brecht’s didactic   theatre. Incidentally, it was from Maiakovski that Fo borrowed   the title “Mistero Buffo”.
Another major achievement in Fo’s large   production is “Accidental Death of an Anarchist”. The play is   about the cross-examining following on the supposed accident. By   and by the questioning is taken over, through a brilliantly   carried out shift, by a Hamlet-like figure – il Matto – who has   the kind of madness that exposes official falsehoods. All in all   there are many topical allusions in Fo’s plays, but the texts   transcend everyday situations and are given a far wider range of   application.
One cannot hold it against Fo that he is a   first-rate actor. The decisive thing is that he has written plays   which arouse the enthusiasm of actors and which captivate his   audiences. The texts are chiselled in an interplay with the   spectators and have often been given their final shape over a   long time. Rapidly changing situations give impetus to the plays   and shape the characters. The rhythm of the actors’ lines, the   witty wording and the aptitude for improvisation combine with   strong intensity and artistic energy in the profoundly   meaningful, steady flow of his flashes of wit. The printed texts   can also give you this feeling it you give free range to your   imagination. Fo’s work brings to the fore the multifarious   abundance of the literary field.
His independence and perspicacity have made   him run great risks and right enough he has been made to   experience the consequences both at home and abroad. When on one   occasion he and his wife, Franca Rame, had been stopped from   making an agreed-on appearance abroad, their friends and   colleagues arranged a representation which they called “An   Evening without Dario Fo and Franca Rame”.
Looking backwards in time from Dario Fo,   the ninety-fourth laureate for literature, to earlier writers   given the award, it is tempting to arrest oneself at
George Bernard Shaw
,   winner of the Prize seventy years ago. On that occasion the   Swedish Academy emphasised the laureate’s idealism, humanity, and   stimulating satire. The two writers are no doubt different from   each other, but the same evaluative words can be applied to Dario   Fo.
Dear Mr. Fo,
The word dignity plays an important part in your oeuvre and is at   the centre of the piece called “The Birth of the Jester”. The   dignity bestowed on you today may have other attributes, but it   has the same core. On behalf of the Swedish Academy I   congratulate you warmly on the work which has resulted in the   Nobel Prize in Literature 1997 and I ask you to step forward to   receive the prize from the hands of His Majesty the King.
From
Les Prix Nobel
. The Nobel Prizes 1997
, Editor Tore Frängsmyr, [Nobel Foundation], Stockholm, 1998
