Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 1999
Nobel Prize for Literature 1999 - Press release
Nobel Prize for Literature 1999 - Bio-bibliography
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 1999
The Nobel Banquet 1999
Nobel Prize in Literature 1999
Günter Grass
- Günter Grass
Swedish Academy
, December 10, 1999.
Translation of the Swedish text.
Dr. Horace Engdahl delivering the       Presentation Speech for the 1999 Nobel Prize in Literature at       the Stockholm Concert Hall.
Photo: Hans Mehlin,
Nobelprize.org
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highness, Ladies   and Gentlemen
,
These days, we often hear talk of the diminishing importance of   literature. We are told that it has been reduced to entertainment   or to a hobby for an isolated elite. But just as a philosopher in   ancient Greece, wishing to reject the Eleatic theory that motion   is impossible, simply walked about in front of the Eleatics   meeting place in the hall of pillars, so having
Günter Grass
present is enough to make us realize that literature will not   easily be pushed to the margin.
Publication of
The Tin Drum
meant a second birth for the   German novel of the twentieth century. Not since
Thomas Mann
‘s
Buddenbrooks
had a first book caused such a stir. This   kind of attention has its price. Just like Mann, Grass later met   with the reproach that, after being so loved by readers and   critics, he had the audacity to write … differently. In Thomas   Mann’s case, this reproach turned up even in the Swedish   Academy’s citation for his Nobel Prize in 1929. The 1999 citation   contains no such reservation.
To the merits of Günter Grass belong not only his creation   of a narrative carnival like
The Tin Drum,
but also the   fact that he hasn’t spent his life trying to repeat this feat.   Time and again, he has left behind the established critical   measures of his greatness and ventured with astonishing liberty   into new undertakings. He has set himself above prohibitions and   expectations, esthetical as well as political. He continues to do   in the newest texts that have come from his workshop.
It’s often said that, with
The Tin Drum,
Grass saved a   vanished world from oblivion – the town of Danzig as it existed   before the Nazis and the war. But readers intent on a magical   time tour should perhaps rather read
Cat and Mouse,
the   short story in which the friendships of boyhood are recalled with   the keenness of loss and guilt.
The Tin Drum,
however, is   something else. It seems to stage the very march of history with   a formidable array of characters and tall stories. But everything   is viewed from an unusually low position a yard above the ground.
The Tin Drum
has its temper from a first person narrator   who resembles nothing in literature or on earth. Regardless of   all the tricksters of folklore, regardless of mythical infants   equipped with the wisdom of old men, regardless of Shakespeare’s   Puck and Hoffmann’s Kleinzach, Oskar Matzerath is a completely   original creation: an infernal intelligence in the body of a   three-year old, a monster who victoriously approaches mankind   with the aid of a tin drum, an intellectual with infantility as   his critical method. If, as one voice in the novel suggests, our   time could wear the motto “Mysticism, barbarism, gloom,” then   Oskar is its sworn enemy. From Dadaism and another cheerfully   destructive avant-garde groups of the beginning of our century,   he has inherited the creative irreverence, but, unlike them,   hasn’t jettisoned reason.
Other German writers – I’m thinking of Arno Schmidt and
Heinrich   Böll
– portrayed the collapse of human values as   apocalypse or tragedy. Grass preferred a literary method more   akin to the one adopted by the anonymous parodist who, sometime   after Homer, depicted martial heroism as the battle between the   frogs and the mice. Grass broke the spell that lay over the   German past and sabotaged the German sublime, the taste for the   somberly blazing magnificence of foredoomed destruction. This was   an achievement far more radical than all the ideological   criticism directed against Nazism. Grass’s novels strip their   characters of grand words and emphasize the solidity of the flesh   by bringing human forms close to the animal world. We all have a   place in his menagerie of cat and mouse, dog, snail, flounder,   frog and scarecrow.
The different books that followed – the feverish
Dog   Years,
the patiently arguing diary novels from the period   when the author was engaged in party politics, the great fables   of the seventies and eighties and so on – taught us to read   in a new way, with our ears and stomachs just as much as with our   eyes and brains. Günter Grass in his expansive phrases   brings together not only the high and the low but also the   subject and its distorted representation in general opinion, that   spiteful mutter for which no one is responsible and of which no   one is innocent. His text displays not the homophony of letters   but the polyphony of orality, like a noisy inn where a voice is   raised without necessarily silencing friends and opponents. His   irony has as many shades as his graphic prints.
The major codes of his work – animals and food – meet in
The   Flounder,
a great novel of the formation and malformation of   civilization. The author musters the courage to engage in a   dialogue with feminism, and attempts a new version of the history   of progress, here told as the story of how eminent female cooks   taught the people to feed on appetizing and wholesome dishes.   With the serious motto that you mustn’t cook without historical   consciousness, Grass develops a mode of thinking one would like   to call
gastrosophy.
In his much-debated
Ein weites Feld
– Grass takes the   daring step of giving an undramatic view of the relationship   between the henchmen of totalitarianism and its victims. He plays   off the eternal humanist against the eternal police informer,   sympathetic understanding against the endless inquisition that   keeps prying into old mistakes even beyond the grave. Of the two   main characters he says: “Seen from the front, they looked very   ill-matched, from behind however, as fitting to each other as two   pieces of a jigsaw puzzle.” There is something so hilariously   insolent, independent and relativistic in Grass’s rendering of   life in Berlin around the Fall of the Wall, that he was bound to   infuriate many readers of his home country.
Günter Grass! Your sense of proportion has done mankind a   genuine service. Your new book has the title
Mein   Jahrhundert
– My Century. The fact that you are receiving the   twentieth century’s last Nobel Literature Prize is confirmation   of the reasonableness of such a title. In your cavalcade of the   past hundred years, you give ample proof of your uncanny ability   to impersonate the voices of the thoughtless: all those bewitched   by the hopes of politics and technology, rendered stupid by the   great perspectives. The core of thoughtlessness is enthusiasm. I   read
Mein Jahrhundert
as a critique of enthusiasm and a   celebration of its opposite, a good memory. Your style, with its   repetitions and specifications and stratification of different   voices, tells us that we shall not be in a hurry either when   dealing with the past or when dealing with the future. You have   shown that as long as literature remembers what people hasten to   forget, it remains a power to be reckoned with.
I would like to express the warm congratulations of the Swedish   Academy as I now request you to receive the Nobel Prize for   Literature from the hands of His Majesty the King.
