Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2002
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2002 - Press release
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2002 - Biobibliography
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 2002
The Nobel Banquet 2002
Nobel Prize in Literature 2002
Imre Kertész
- Imre Kertész
Swedish   Academy
, December 10, 2002.
Translation of the Swedish text.
Writer Torgny Lindgren delivering the       Presentation Speech for the 2002 Nobel Prize in Literature at       the Stockholm Concert Hall.
Photo: Hans Mehlin
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highnesses, Ladies                  and Gentlemen,
The realities that are the subject of Imre   Kertész’s literary production and form its background cannot   be understood or described by any of us who have not experienced   them. The bestial, systematic evil of Nazism and the   bureaucratic, misanthropic stupidity of the socialistic one-party   state are hardly comprehensible to minds that have been shaped in   civilized societies: nor do they allow themselves to be portrayed   in other ways than as crazy paradoxes and absurdities.
Imre Kertész has written about this artistic problem in his
Galley Diary
and in his essay collection
Eine   Gedankenlänge Stille.
It has often been argued that
Fateless
is the hub and   center of Kertész’s literary production. That may be   correct: this ostensibly simple, naked and mundanely unassuming   account of a young boy’s life and sufferings in Auschwitz, Zeitz   and Buchenwald possesses a weightiness and irrefutability that   puts it not only at the core of one man’s literary production but   also of contemporary European prose.
“When you are going to read Kertész, you have to begin with
Fateless
!” is a very common statement. However, it can   be called into question.
No matter which Kertész novel or essay we pick up, we soon   notice that it is intimately connected to one of the other works   in his literary production. In a manner that is hard to explain,   the separate parts appear to have grown together, with common   root fibers or circulatory systems.
Fiasco,
that   many-voiced, off-center account of a system-critical writer’s   desperate hardships in a totalitarian, anti-educational state, is   linked by allusions and thematic details with
The English   Flag,
which in turn is intimately connected to the much   later book of thoughts
Galley Diary.
From
Kaddish   for a Child Not Born,
a mournful and simultaneously ironic   requiem for a child who is never allowed to be born, because it   would be cruel and criminal to bring it into the world, there are   delicate but easily discernible threads that link it to
Fateless
and
Fiasco.
What finally reveals itself to the reader is a coherent organism,   a body or symphonic work in the spirit of Mahler or Webern. Or in   a word that borrows its solemn tone from the aging
Thomas Mann
: Ein   WERK. An oeuvre, whose subject is an individual’s refusal to   abandon his individual will by merging it with a collective   identity.
And behind each text, we clearly hear a voice or tone that   Kertész himself has formulated this way: In all respects my   existence is horrible, except for writing: so I write and write   to endure my existence, to justify it.
Kertész approaches tradition in a similar contrapuntal way.   In his world, tradition is not a temporal phenomenal, but a   spatial one. Tradition is his surroundings, the landscape where   he resides and where on his rambles he encounters social   companions and conversational companions like
Camus
, Nietzsche,   Schopenhauer, St. John of the Cross, Kafka or Paul Celan.
Sehr verehrter Imre Kertesz!
Uns, die wir Ihrer Dichtung begegnet sind und den Vorteil hatten   uns in sie zu vertiefen, scheint sie notwendig und unentbehrlich   um das “20. Jahrhundert, das wir noch unser eigenes nennen   müssen, zu verstehen. Und das um so mehr, um auch das   Schwanken zwischen Schicksal und Freiheit zu begreifen, welches   das Los des preisgegebenen und wehrlosen Menschen während   dieses Jahrhunderts gewesen ist. Es war und ist eine Zeit, die   scheinbar Ihre Hypothese bestätigt, dass der Affe vom   Menschen abstammt und nicht umgekehrt. Hinter diesem Gedanken,   der ein wenig misanthropisch vorkommen mag, hört man   deutlich den milden und klugen Humor, der Ihr ganzes   schriftstellerisches Werk durchströmt.
Sie haben auch einmal geschrieben: Ich werde immer ein   zweitrangiger, verkannter und missverstandener ungarischer   Schriftsteller sein; die ungarische Sprache wird immer eine   zweitrangige, verkannte und missverstandene Sprache sein.
Gegen diese ironische Behauptung möchte die Schwedische   Akademie am kräftigsten protestieren und Ihnen gleichzeitig   herzlich gratulieren, wenn ich Sie jetzt auffordere, den   Nobelpreis für Literatur aus der Hand Seiner Majestät   des Königs entgegenzunehmen.
