Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2003
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2003 - Press release
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2003 - Bioibliographical notes
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 2003
The Nobel Banquet 2003
Nobel Prize in Literature 2003
J. M. Coetzee
- J. M. Coetzee
Swedish   Academy
, December 10, 2003.
Translation of the Swedish text.
Writer Per Wästberg delivering the       Presentation Speech for the 2003 Nobel Prize in Literature at       the Stockholm Concert Hall.
Photo: Hans Mehlin
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highnesses, Esteemed                  Nobel Laureates, Ladies and Gentlemen,
To write is to awaken counter-voices within   oneself, and to dare enter into dialogue with them. The dangerous   attraction of the inner self is John Coetzee’s theme: the senses   and bodies of people, the interiority of Africa. “To imagine the   unimaginable” is the writer’s duty. As a post-modern allegorist,   Coetzee knows that novels that do not seek to mimic reality best   convince us that reality exists.
Coetzee sees through the obscene poses and   false pomp of history, lending voice to the silenced and the   despised. Restrained but stubborn, he defends the ethical value   of poetry, literature and imagination. Without them, we blinker   ourselves and become bureaucrats of the soul.
John Coetzee’s characters seek refuge   beyond the zones of power.
Life and Times of Michael K.
gives form to the dream of an individual outside the fabric of   human coexistence. Michael K. is a virgin being, viewing the   world from an infinite remove. Although exposed to the violence   of racist tyranny, he achieves through passivity a freedom that   confounds both the apartheid regime and the guerrilla forces   simply because he wants nothing: neither war nor revolution,   neither power nor money.
Waiting for the Barbarians
is a   disturbing love story about wanting to possess another person and   to turn that person inside out as though she were a riddle to be   solved. Everyone who has recognised the threat of totalitarianism   and felt the desire to own another person can learn from   Coetzee’s dark fables. With intense concreteness and verbally   disciplined desperation, he tackles one of the great problems of   the ages: understanding the driving forces of brutality, torture   and injustice.
Who does the writing, who seizes power by   taking pen in hand? Can black experience be depicted by a white   person? In
Foe
, Friday is an African, already   dehumanised by Defoe. To give speech to Friday would be to   colonise him and deny him what remains of his integrity. The girl   in
Waiting for the Barbarians
speaks an unintelligible   language and has been blinded by torture; Michael K has a harelip   and Friday has had his tongue cut out. His life is recounted by   Susan Barton: that is, through ‘white writing’, the title of one   of Coetzee’s books.
However hard we attempt to grasp Michael   and Friday, they have been made, by Coetzee, unsullied by   interpretation. They remain silent. But between the lines, in   what is unspoken, there is a distillation of feelings uncommon in   contemporary literature.
The myth of the survivor on a desert island   is the only story there is, Coetzee once said. Several of his   books treat similar solitudes. Is it possible to stand outside   history? Does freedom from the diktat of authority exist? “I   don’t like accomplices. God, let me be alone,” says Jacobus   Coetzee in the first novel,
Dusklands
, rejoicing in   being abandoned. But he remains the tool of history, and what   compels the natives to take him seriously is his victorious   violence. He does, however, ask himself whether the blacks   populate a wonderful world closed to his own senses: “Perhaps I   have killed something of inestimable value.”
Coetzee’s work runs like a high-tension   cable across an inhospitable South African landscape. Mrs. Curran   in A
ge of Iron
has witnessed monstrous actions but is   unable to condemn them using the words of others. Neither will   Coetzee himself sign petitions or join in political rallies.
In the dystopian novel
Disgrace
,   David Lurie does not achieve creativity and freedom until,   stripped of all dignity, he is afflicted by his own shame and   history’s disgrace. In this work, Coetzee summarises his themes:   race and gender, ownership and violence, and the moral and   political complicity of everyone in that borderland where the   languages of liberation and reconciliation carry no meaning.
Every new book by Coetzee is astonishingly   unlike his others. He intrudes into the uninhabited spaces of his   readers. In his autobiographies, he pitilessly ransacks his   former selves. In his essay-novel Elizabeth Costello he combines,   with uninhibited humour and irony, contemporary narrative and   myth, philosophy and gossip.
Dear John Coetzee,
Your work is limited in pages, limitless in   scope. What I have said in Swedish to those present here is   merely in so many words: “Don’t listen to me, just go home and   read, and some images will stay with you forever.”
In your own life, you have recently moved   along the very latitude that unites Cape Town and Adelaide. You   may have left South Africa; it will hardly leave you. For the   Swedish Academy, national roots are irrelevant and we do not   recognize what in Europe is often called the literary   periphery.
You are a Truth and Reconciliation   Commission on your own, starting with the basic words for our   deepest concerns. Unsettling and surprising us, you have dug   deeply into the ground of the human condition with its cruelty   and loneliness. You have given a voice to those outside the   hierarchies of the mighty. With intellectual honesty and density   of feeling, in a prose of icy precision, you have unveiled the   masks of our civilization and uncovered the topography of   evil.
I would like to express the warmest   congratulations of the Swedish Academy as I now request you to   receive this year’s Nobel Prize for Literature from the hands of   His Majesty the King.
