Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2004 - Presentation Speech
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2004
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2004 - Prize announcement
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2004 - Press release
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2004 - Bio-bibliography
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 2004
Nobel Prize in Literature 2004
Elfriede Jelinek
- Elfriede Jelinek
English
Swedish
Swedish   Academy
, December 10, 2004.
Horace Engdahl delivering   the Presentation Speech for the 2004 Nobel Prize in Literature   at the Stockholm Concert Hall.
Photo: Hans Mehlin
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highnesses, Ladies and Gentlemen,
What first perplexes when reading Elfriede   Jelinek is the strange, mixed voice that speaks from her writing.   The author is everywhere and nowhere, never quite standing behind   her words, nor ever ceding to her literary figures in order to   allow the illusion that they should exist outside her language.   There is nothing but a stream of saturated sentences, seemingly   welded together under high pressure and leaving no room for moments   of relaxation.
Elfriede Jelinek deliberately opens her work   to the clichés that flood the news media, advertising and   popular culture — the collective subconscious of our time.   She manipulates the codes of pulp literature, comics, soap operas,   pornography and folkloristic novels (
Heimatsroman
), so that the   inherent madness in these ostensibly harmless consumer phenomena   shines through. She mimics the prejudices we would never admit   to, and captures, hidden behind common sense, a poisonous mumble   of no origin or address: the voice of the masses. She has said   that she taps at language to hear its hidden ideologies, much as   a doctor will tap on a patient’s chest. Aghast, we discover   how class oppression, sexism, chauvinism and the distortion of   history echo through everyday conversation. Sport is immediately   suspect: its militaristic drills, the uniforms, the cult of the   strong and the victorious. Nature: a political trap. Austria’s   alpine landscape has been the perfect backdrop for her destruction   of the idyllic.
When our normal ideals and daydreams are rendered   with Elfriede Jelinek’s instrumentation of heartless word-plays,   macabre metaphors and infernally twisted quotations from the classics,   they are never again the same. Her insinuating tone, like infrared   light elucidates the hidden writing of civilisation. Where we saw   normal society, we now see a locked-down system of male/female,   assault and submission, hunter and prey. Indeed, we are forced   to accept that we find the hunter’s language sexier than   the prey’s. Elfriede Jelinek’s social criticism is   formed not from the safe distance of superior knowledge but from   the depths of an unqualified contamination. In her works, the dead   return not to comfort but to bear witness. Ghosts are as ubiquitous   as the living, and there is no clear distinction between them.   The woman’s being is like the vampire’s, at once alive   and dead, since her full expression is forbidden. Some of Elfriede   Jelinek’s heroines seem to have stepped out of male fantasies   of blood-sucking she-monsters from the turn of the 20th century.   As heir to a long line of linguistically critical Austrian writers,   from Johann Nepomuk Nestroy to Ingeborg Bachmann and Thomas Bernhard,   she also knows the importance of deflating the pathos of disaster.   Her parade of luckless princesses from fairytales and real life   in the drama suite
Der Tod und das Mädchen
is condensed   into the picture of Marilyn Monroe’s blonde hair billowing out   from under the lid when they close the coffin at her funeral. Swiftly   comes the deprecating simile: “like foam seeping from a fire   extinguisher”.
Literary genres pale to disappearance under   Jelinek’s hand. Her plays are not theatre, rather “texts   to be spoken”, liberated from the tyranny of dramatical roles.   Astonished directors find she has delivered into their hands material   to revolutionise theatre.
Her novels — the sweet girls as losers   in
Women as Lovers
, the murderous logic of youth revolt in
Wonderful,   Wonderful Times
, the aesthetic of self-mutilation in
The   Pianist
,   the endless repetition of the simple fact of penetration in
Lust
,   the ABC of the violation of women in
Gier
— cheerfully break   the laws of classic narrative art. The author does not cede the   floor, observing her characters almost as insects under a glass   cover. Her phrasing is itself the action. Through the musical interchange   of voices and counter-voices, a world comes into being, illuminated   by her life-giving fury.
What is a hero in a literary work? Other differences   aside, it is
someone who is right when the world is wrong
. In male   modernism, it has often been the author himself, disguised as the   solitary voice of the outcast ego. This invites empathy and identification,   thereby producing literature’s eternal karaoke-effect, where   the reader joins in on the chorus. The difficulty in reading Elfriede   Jelinek is that there is no sympathetic narrator in whom the reader   can rest and with whom the reader can identify. It is an awakening   from the narcissism of reading.
Her writings perhaps give us a dark picture   of life, but she is no pessimist, since in pessimism there is generally   a whiff of self-pity and a tacit plea. Rather, grinding through   her imprecations is a scandalous joviality without hope, rays from   a black sun.
Most honoured Elfriede Jelinek!
In the words of Hegel, woman is society’s irony. Through your   writing, you have given new currency to an heretical feminine tradition   and have expanded the art of literature. You negotiate with neither   society nor your time, nor do you adapt to your readers. If literature   by definition is a force that bends to nothing, you are in our   day one of its truest representatives.
