Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2005 - Presentation Speech
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2005
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2005 - Prize announcement
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2005 - Press release
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2005 - Bio-bibliography
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 2005
Nobel Prize in Literature 2005
Harold Pinter
- Harold Pinter
English
Swedish
Swedish   Academy
, Chairman of its Nobel Committee, December 10, 2005.
Per Wästberg delivering the Presentation   Speech for the 2005 Nobel Prize in Literature at the Stockholm   Concert Hall.
Photo: Hans Mehlin
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highnesses, Esteemed Nobel Laureates, Ladies and Gentlemen,
Harold Pinter is the renewer of English drama   in the 20th century. “Pinteresque” is an adjective   listed in the Oxford Dictionary. Like Kafka, Proust and Graham   Greene he has charted a territory, a Pinterland with a distinct   topography.
With his twenty-nine plays and about a hundred   that he has directed or acted in, he has made the theatre his own   domain. His figures barricade themselves in unpredictable dialogues.   Between the lines of unresolved threats, it roils and stings. What   we hear are signals for everything we do not hear.
The abyss under chat, the unwillingness to   communicate other than superficially, the need to rule and mislead,   the suffocating sensation of accidents bubbling under the quotidian,   the nervous perception that a dangerous story has been censored – all   this vibrates through Pinter’s drama.
His characters are at the mercy of each other   on the periphery of life. They are also prisoners in the limbo   of class divisions, set phrases and solidified habits. Their identities,   backgrounds and histories are vague, and different versions exist   depending on who is remembering. They seldom listen to each other   but it is precisely their mental deafness that makes us listen.   Not a word passes unnoticed, nor can we relax a single minute.   Atmospheric pressure fluctuates as secrets unroll and shift the   distribution of power.
Memories –  invented, manipulated or real –  flow   as a hot undercurrent through Pinter’s plays. We model the   past to respond to the demands of the present and to form our future.
As closed rooms open to an international community,   Pinter redefines romantic love as a more resilient love that includes   friendship and the exigency to promote justice through action.   In
Mountain Language
, love takes the form of an unconditional generosity   missing in his earlier works. To survive, we must do good deeds   and stand up for the enslaved in this age of terror and spiralling   violence.
It is usually said that Pinter’s political   commitment came late. But Pinter himself describes even his first   period –
The Dumb Waiter
,
The Birthday Party
,
The   Hothouse
–  as   political. In these “comedies of menace”, language   is a weapon of aggression, evasion and torture. The early works   can be seen as metaphors for authoritarian intervention on several   levels: the power of the state, the power of the family, the power   of religion –  all undermining the individual’s critical   questions. Pinter uncovers the reasons for wanting to destroy the   identity of others and the fear disguised as violence against those   who stand outside the party, club or nation.
Pinter’s work has neither winners nor   losers. In the power game between characters, we seldom know who   has the upper hand; they change places, growing and sinking through   lines that seldom seem deliberate. The characters have sides invisible   to the eye, exposed in the ultraviolet rays of ambiguity. They   grope forward between invisible walls and stratify into different   levels of reality. In defending themselves against intrusion, they   blockade themselves in spaces mined like alien terrain.
Pinter has perforated conventionally realistic   drama with taciturnity’s mystery, and has equipped his overblown   figures with so many outlets that we can live with the characters   and see them age and decay as we do. The solid and impenetrable   figures of public life disintegrate in disastrous incoherence.   They send messages that never seem to arrive, yet we leave the   theatre less righteous than on entering.
For systematists, the world exists to put in   order. For Harold Pinter it is for dissembling, through which the   good and the humane find a way to seep out through the bureaucratic   cage of ingrained reflexes. In a ruthless analysis of the totalitarian,   he illuminates the pain of the individual.
Throwaway lines sting, little words corrode,   what is half-said crushes, what is tacit forebodes catastrophe.   Pinter, the tailor’s son, scissors language, allowing the action to originate from the voices and rhythms of the characters. Thus, there is no given plot. We do not ask: “What will happen next”? Rather, “What   is happening”?
The words are instruments of power. Words are   repeated until they resemble truth. In a time of over-information,   Pinter frees words from describing reality and makes them reality   itself, at times poetic, more often oppressive. At the end, it   is only through language that we can erase our destiny and recreate   it.
Dear Harold Pinter,
In its choice of a Nobel Laureate the Swedish Academy recognises only the creative power of a single individual regardless of nation, sex and literary genre. This needs emphasising. However British you may appear in the eyes of many, your international and inter-human impact in the field of drama has been uniquely strong and inspiring for half a century. If someone thinks your prize is late in coming, we may reply that at any given moment somewhere in the world your plays are reinterpreted by new generations of directors and actors.
In your works, seductively accessible and frighteningly mysterious, the curtain rises on dense life-landscapes and harrowing confinement. In poetic images, you illuminate an existence where fantasy and   the nightmare of reality clash.
In the absence of this year’s Nobel Laureate in Literature,   I request his publisher Mr. Stephen Page to come forward and receive   Mr. Pinter’s Prize from the hands of His Majesty the King.
