Enhanced Page Navigation
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2006 - Presentation Speech
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2006
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2006 - Prize announcement
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2006 - Press release
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2006 - Biobibliographical Notes
The Nobel Prize in Literature 2006 - Speed read: The city and the world
The Nobel Prize Award Ceremony 2006
The Nobel Banquet 2006
Nobel Prize in Literature 2006
Orhan Pamuk
- Orhan Pamuk
English
Swedish
Swedish       Academy
, Member of its Nobel Committee,
Professor Horace                     Engdahl delivering the Presentation                   Speech for the 2006 Nobel Prize in Literature at the Stockholm                   Concert Hall.
Photo: Hans Mehlin
Your Majesties, Your Royal Highnesses, Ladies and Gentlemen,
In his book about his native Istanbul, Orhan Pamuk describes   how, as a young man, he was enraptured by a magnificent volume of   early 19th century engravings depicting the erstwhile capital of   the vast Ottoman empire . The artist was German, embodying European   landscape painting techniques and outlook — that combination   of daydreaming and curiosity about the world that we call the picturesque   and that was still alien to Turkish culture. But it was with genuine   Istanbulite knowledge that the painter, after many years working   in the city, saw the palaces, streets, throngs and the play of light   on the Bosphorus waters. He had to be both Easterner — to   understand what he was seeing — and Westerner to have the   method to portray it.
Orhan Pamuk is describing here his own double view of reality.   When Pamuk uses the Western form for the novel, it sheds its firm   central perspective, tied to the protagonist’s actions and   emotions. Instead, we are drawn into a labyrinth of stories and   beliefs, where the person we identify with can at any moment meet   himself as a stranger, advancing from another direction, from another   life or another culture.
In
My Name is Red
, Pamuk uses a sultan’s painters   of miniatures in 1590s Istanbul to stage a conflict between Western   individualism and Eastern traditionalism. As the novel presents   it, the classic Muslim standpoint is that paintings must illustrate   familiar stories. To portray only what the eye sees in nature is   a blasphemy. Ideally, one should paint from memory, painting the   essence of the object and not its appearance, discarding everything   extraneous and elevating oneself to Allah’s view of the world.   To leave traces in the work that can be identified as personal style   was seen by the ancient masters as proof of ineptitude. For them,   Western portraiture expressed a sinful desire to show pride before   God. Anyone who would allow himself to be thus portrayed, believes   himself to be singularly important and positions himself at the   world’s centre, as does the deliberately original artist with   his style. Such a person will no longer bow to authorities but assumes   the right to doubt everything and anything. That unique brushstroke,   when the painter’s hand obeys only his gaze, is a movement   that threatens to topple every holy truth.
The choice between alternative views in the novel is seductively   simple for a modern reader, but is revealed to be treacherous. At   the same time as Pamuk, through his way of writing, appears to be   on the side of personal style, he questions whether the unique stroke   actually exists. Do not both love and art imply the imitation of   gestures we have seen in others?
In Pamuk’s major work,
The Black Book,
civilisation   appears as a boundless plagiarism where people flee into each other’s   imagined lives to be free from themselves and experience love. You   become what you describe.
The Black Book
is an odyssey through   a night-time Istanbul full of genies and semi-beings, a city where   invented stories attract more credibility than the true, and truth   is a shadow on the wall. A dream world and a metaphor for the cosmos.   Man’s helpless need for narration has seldom been described   more tellingly. Like Oscar Wilde pointing out that the Thames fog   was imitating Turner’s painting, Pamuk shows that the real   Istanbul exists only because of its fabulists.
In his novel
Snow,
Pamuk travels to a forgotten town on   a remote Turkish border. This displacement, no less drastic than   a journey from Earth to Moon, gives him the opportunity to take   a geological core sample of all levels of Turkish society, from   the loyal state establishment to disappointed leftist intellectuals,   Islamic fundamentalists, Kurds and the mystically suicidal girls   fighting for the right to wear veils. In the centre of the story   stands a Western-influenced poet looking for a way back from exile.
Snow
has   been called a political novel, but more than the expression of an   opinion, it is, like Dostoyevsky’s
Demons
, a criticism   of politics and its impact on the human mind. The fanatic’s   conviction stems from a blindness to the motivations of others.   Against this, Pamuk puts the writer’s emphatic identification   with all his figures, beyond good and evil. The inherent irony of   the events is the only judgment that he passes. The novel’s   charismatic fundamentalist, who terrifies the authorities and bewitches   the woman the poet wants to love — on a mystic level, their   struggle is Orpheus’s defeat by Dionysus — this death-defying   terrorist first of all strives to have his threats against Europe   published in one of the big German newspapers so that the West will   pay him notice. In the end,
Snow
is a book about the right   to uncertainty and vacillation, about love as a lifelong defeat   and about the longing for God.
Most honoured Orhan Pamuk! You have made your native city an indispensable   literary territory, equal to Dostoyevsky’s St. Petersburg,   Joyce’s Dublin or Proust’s Paris – a place where   readers from all corners of the world can live another life, just   as credible as their own, filled by an alien feeling that they immediately   recognise as their own.
I would like to express the warm congratulations of the Swedish   Academy as I now request you to receive this year’s Nobel   Prize for Literature from the hand of His Majesty the King.
